Sepsis is a global health concern accounting for more than 1 in 5 deaths worldwide. Sepsis is now defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. Sepsis can develop from bacterial (gram negative or gram positive), fungal or viral (such as COVID) infections. However, therapeutics developed in animal models and traditional in vitro sepsis models have had little success in clinical trials, as these models have failed to fully replicate the underlying pathophysiology and heterogeneity of the disease. The current understanding is that the host response to sepsis is highly diverse among patients, and this heterogeneity impacts immune function and response to infection. Phenotyping immune function and classifying sepsis patients into specific endotypes is needed to develop a personalized treatment approach. Neutrophil-endothelium interactions play a critical role in sepsis progression, and increased neutrophil influx and endothelial barrier disruption have important roles in the early course of organ damage. Understanding the mechanism of neutrophil-endothelium interactions and how immune function impacts this interaction can help us better manage the disease and lead to the discovery of new diagnostic and prognosis tools for effective treatments. In this review, we will discuss the latest research exploring how in silico modeling of a synergistic combination of new organ-on-chip models incorporating human cells/tissue, omics analysis and clinical data from sepsis patients will allow us to identify relevant signaling pathways and characterize specific immune phenotypes in patients. Emerging technologies such as machine learning can then be leveraged to identify druggable therapeutic targets and relate them to immune phenotypes and underlying infectious agents. This synergistic approach can lead to the development of new therapeutics and the identification of FDA approved drugs that can be repurposed for the treatment of sepsis.

The aim of this review was to summarise the most recent evidence about the use of omics-based techniques as an instrument for a more rapid and accurate characterisation of respiratory tract infections, neurological infections and sepsis in paediatrics.

We performed a narrative review using PubMed and a set of inclusion criteria: English language articles, clinical trials, meta-analysis and reviews including only paediatric population inherited to this topic in the last 15 years.

The examined studies suggest that host gene expression signatures are an effective method to characterise the different types of infections, to distinguish infection from colonisation and, in some cases, to assess the severity of the disease in children.

'Omics-based techniques' may help to define the aetiology of infections in paediatrics, representing a useful tool to choose the most appropriate therapies and limit antibiotic resistance.

Despite advances in therapeutics, a significant portion of patients with Crohn's disease still require surgical management. In this article, we present updates to the natural history, prognostication and postoperative monitoring, and novel therapeutics in the prevention and treatment of postoperative Crohn's disease recurrence.

Clinical risk factors have been associated with higher rates of postoperative recurrence (POR), and in recent studies demonstrate an increased cumulative risk with presence of additional risk factors. Additional novel clinical, histologic, and "-omic" risk factors for recurrence have recently been elucidated, including the role of the mesentery on recurrence and perioperative intraabdominal septic complications. High-risk patients benefit most from medical prophylaxis, including anti-TNF with or without immunomodulator therapy to prevent recurrence. New biologics such as vedolizumab and ustekinumab have emerging evidence in the use of prophylaxis, especially with recent REPREVIO trial data. Non-invasive disease monitoring, such as cross-sectional enterography, intestinal ultrasound, and fecal calprotectin, have been validated against ileocolonoscopy. Recent advances in the prediction, prevention, and monitoring algorithms of postoperative Crohn's disease may be leading to a reduction in postoperative recurrence. Ongoing trials will help determine optimal monitoring and management strategies for this at-risk population.

Sepsis remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality in both low- and high-income countries. Antibiotic therapy and supportive care have significantly improved survival following sepsis in the twentieth century, but further progress has been challenging. Immunotherapy trials for sepsis, mainly aimed at suppressing the immune response, from the 1990s and 2000s, have largely failed, in part owing to unresolved patient heterogeneity in the underlying immune disbalance. The past decade has brought the promise to break this blockade through technological developments based on omics-based technologies and systems medicine that can provide a much larger data space to describe in greater detail the immune endotypes in sepsis. Patient stratification opens new avenues towards precision medicine approaches that aim to apply immunotherapies to sepsis, on the basis of precise biomarkers and molecular mechanisms defining specific immune endotypes. This approach has the potential to lead to the establishment of immunotherapy as a successful pillar in the treatment of sepsis for future generations.

Patients with large burn injuries remain a challenge. The loss of skin barrier integrity and induced immunosuppression after injury increases their vulnerability to infection. Sepsis remains the primary cause of death for burn-injured patients who survive their acute injury and resuscitation. The objective of this work is to describe the current understanding and management of sepsis in the burn-injured patient and newer strategies to approach its management. Current understanding of the systemic inflammatory response to burn injury and sepsis, preventative strategies, and novel research will be discussed. Understanding the origin of burn sepsis from wounds themselves is key to understanding current paradigms. Infection control and management begins from the time of injury and continues throughout the patient's hospital course. The use of personal protective equipment, burn unit design considerations, and optimization of prevention protocols and catheter care all play a role in burn sepsis prevention and management. The emergence of drug-resistant pathogens poses a particular challenge for burn patients due to the chronicity with which their wounds are sometimes open. The difficulty of systemic antibiotics to reach wounds has underscored the need to anticipate resistant organisms moving forward. Antibiotic strategies and newer approaches, such as phage therapy, will be discussed. Multi-omics approaches to understanding burn sepsis have developed in hopes of identifying patients more susceptible or at risk of developing burn sepsis. As with many aspects of burn care, a multidisciplinary, proactive approach to the management of burn sepsis is key to minimizing the morbidity and mortality associated with this complication.

Dielma fastidiosa is a gram-negative, anaerobic rod belonging to the family Erysipelotrichaceae. D. fastidiosa has previously been isolated in human stool samples as part of the commensal flora; however, prior to this case, it has never been identified as a human pathogen. We present the first case of bacteraemia with D. fastidiosa. Bacterial growth in the blood culture bottle was detected by the automated blood culture system BacT/ALERT 3D. Culturing was performed, and bacterial colonies were identified as D. fastidiosa using MALDI-TOF MS. A subsequent whole-genome sequencing using Illumina NovaSeq was performed, and a phylogenetic tree depicting all available sequences of D. fastidiosa was generated. The reference MALDI-TOF spectrum and species identification was compared with the previously published spectrum. Whole-genome sequencing confirmed the tentative MALDI-TOF species identification. Notably, the maximum-likelihood-based phylogenetic analysis placed the D. fastidiosa isolate from this clinical case within the known variation of the eight publicly available sequences of this species. We identified D. fastidiosa by whole-genome sequencing followed by maximum-likelihood analysis as a possible pathogen in this case of bacteraemia in a patient hospitalized with diverticulitis.

Background: Recent evidence has shown that the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) rPvt1 is elevated in septic myocardial tissues and that its knockdown attenuates sepsis-induced myocardial injury. However, the mechanism underlying the role of rPvt1 in septic myocardial dysfunction has not been elucidated. Methods: In this study, we performed transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic assays and conducted an integrated multi-omics analysis to explore the association between rPvt1 and lipopolysaccharide (Lipopolysaccharide)-induced H9C2 cardiomyocyte injury. LncRNA rPvt1 silencing was achieved using a lentiviral transduction system. Results: Compared to those with the negative control, rPvt1 knockdown led to large changes in the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome. Specifically, 2,385 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 272 differentially abundant proteins and 75 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) were identified through each omics analysis, respectively. Gene Ontology functional annotation, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, Nr, eukaryotic orthologous groups, and Clusters of Orthologous Groups of Proteins pathway analyses were performed on these differentially expressed/abundant factors. The results suggested that mitochondrial energy metabolism might be closely related to the mechanism through which Pvt1 functions. Conclusion: These genes, proteins, metabolites, and their related dysregulated pathways could thus be promising targets for studies investigating the rPvt1-regluatory mechanisms involved in septic myocardial dysfunction, which is important for formulating novel strategies for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of septic myocardial injury.

Vertebrates differ greatly in responses to pro-inflammatory agonists such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), complicating use of animal models to study human sepsis or inflammatory disorders. We compared transcriptomes of resting and LPS-exposed blood from six LPS-sensitive species (rabbit, pig, sheep, cow, chimpanzee, human) and four LPS-resilient species (mice, rats, baboon, rhesus), as well as plasma proteomes and lipidomes. Unexpectedly, at baseline, sensitive species already had enhanced expression of LPS-responsive genes relative to resilient species. After LPS stimulation, maximally different genes in resilient species included genes that detoxify LPS, diminish bacterial growth, discriminate sepsis from SIRS, and play roles in autophagy and apoptosis. The findings reveal the molecular landscape of species differences in inflammation, and may inform better selection of species for pre-clinical models.

Severe sepsis causes organ dysfunction and continues to be the leading reason for pediatric death worldwide. Early recognition of sepsis could substantially promote precision treatment and reduce the risk of pediatric death. The host cellular response to infection during sepsis between adults and pediatrics could be significantly different. A growing body of studies focused on finding markers in pediatric sepsis in recent years using multi-omics approaches. This narrative review summarized the progress in studying pediatric sepsis biomarkers from genome, transcript, protein, and metabolite levels according to the omics technique that has been applied for biomarker screening. It is most likely not a single biomarker could work for precision diagnosis of sepsis, but a panel of markers and probably a combination of markers detected at multi-levels. Importantly, we emphasize the importance of group distinction of infectious agents in sepsis patients for biomarker identification, because the host response to infection of bacteria, virus, or fungus could be substantially different and thus the results of biomarker screening. Further studies on the investigation of sepsis biomarkers that were caused by a specific group of infectious agents should be encouraged in the future, which will better improve the clinical execution of personalized medicine for pediatric sepsis.

Traditional Chinese medicine prescription sini decoction (SND) can alleviate inflammation, improve microcirculation, and modulate immune status in sepsis patients. However, its underlying mechanisms remain unclear, and therapeutic effects may vary among individuals.

Through a comprehensive and systematic network pharmacology analysis, the purpose of this study is to investigate the therapeutic mechanisms of SND in treating sepsis.

An analysis of WGCNA identified CX3CR1 as a key gene influencing sepsis prognosis. A drug-active component-target network for SND was created using the traditional Chinese medicine systems pharmacology (TCMSP) database and Cytoscape software. Shared targets between SND and CX3CR1 high-expression gene modules were found through the GEO database. Gene module functionality was analyzed using GO, KEGG, GSEA, and GSVA. Unsupervised clustering of sepsis patients was performed based on the ferroptosis gene set, and immune cell interactions and mechanisms were explored using CIBERSORT, single-cell sequencing, and intercellular communication analysis.

This study demonstrates that high expression of CX3CR1 improves survival rates in sepsis patients and is associated with immune cell signaling pathways. SND contains 116 active components involved in oxidative stress and lipid metabolism pathways. HMOX1, a co-expressed gene in SND and CX3CR1 high-expression gene module, plays a crucial role in sepsis survival. Unsupervised clustering analysis classified sepsis patients into three clusters based on the ferroptosis gene set, revealing differences in immune cell expression and involvement in heme metabolism pathways. Notably, intercellular interactions among immune cells primarily occur through paracrine and autocrine mechanisms in MIF, GALECTIN, and IL16 signaling pathways, modulating the immune-inflammatory microenvironment in sepsis.

This study identifies CX3CR1 as a crucial molecule impacting sepsis prognosis through WGCNA analysis. It reveals that SND's active component, quercetin and kaempferol, target HMOX1 via related pathways to regulate heme metabolism, reduce inflammation, inhibit ferroptosis, and improve immune function, ultimately improving sepsis prognosis. These findings offer a solid pharmacological foundation and potential therapeutic targets for SND in treating sepsis.

In the last decades, it has become evident that endothelial cells (ECs) in the microvasculature play an important role in the pathophysiology of sepsis-associated multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). Studies on how ECs orchestrate leukocyte recruitment, control microvascular integrity and permeability, and regulate the haemostatic balance have provided a wealth of knowledge and potential molecular targets that could be considered for pharmacological intervention in sepsis. Yet, this information has not been translated into effective treatments. As MODS affects specific vascular beds, (organotypic) endothelial heterogeneity may be an important contributing factor to this lack of success. On the other hand, given the involvement of ECs in sepsis, this heterogeneity could also be leveraged for therapeutic gain to target specific sites of the vasculature given its full accessibility to drugs. In this review, we describe current knowledge that defines heterogeneity of organ-specific microvascular ECs at the molecular level and elaborate on studies that have reported EC responses across organ systems in sepsis patients and animal models of sepsis. We discuss hypothesis-driven, single-molecule studies that have formed the basis of our understanding of endothelial cell engagement in sepsis pathophysiology, and include recent studies employing high-throughput technologies. The latter deliver comprehensive data sets to describe molecular signatures for organotypic ECs that could lead to new hypotheses and form the foundation for rational pharmacological intervention and biomarker panel development. Particularly results from single cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomics studies are eagerly awaited as they are expected to unveil the full spatiotemporal signature of EC responses to sepsis. With increasing awareness of the existence of distinct sepsis subphenotypes, and the need to develop new drug regimen and companion diagnostics, a better understanding of the molecular pathways exploited by ECs in sepsis pathophysiology will be a cornerstone to halt the detrimental processes that lead to MODS.

Resolving chromatin-remodeling-linked gene expression changes at cell-type resolution is important for understanding disease states. Here we describe MAGICAL (Multiome Accessibility Gene Integration Calling and Looping), a hierarchical Bayesian approach that leverages paired single-cell RNA sequencing and single-cell transposase-accessible chromatin sequencing from different conditions to map disease-associated transcription factors, chromatin sites, and genes as regulatory circuits. By simultaneously modeling signal variation across cells and conditions in both omics data types, MAGICAL achieved high accuracy on circuit inference. We applied MAGICAL to study Staphylococcus aureus sepsis from peripheral blood mononuclear single-cell data that we generated from subjects with bloodstream infection and uninfected controls. MAGICAL identified sepsis-associated regulatory circuits predominantly in CD14 monocytes, known to be activated by bacterial sepsis. We addressed the challenging problem of distinguishing host regulatory circuit responses to methicillin-resistant and methicillin-susceptible S. aureus infections. Although differential expression analysis failed to show predictive value, MAGICAL identified epigenetic circuit biomarkers that distinguished methicillin-resistant from methicillin-susceptible S. aureus infections.

Lipids may influence cellular penetrance by viral pathogens and the immune response that they evoke. We deeply phenotyped the lipidomic response to SARs-CoV-2 and compared that with infection with other pathogens in patients admitted with acute respiratory distress syndrome to an intensive care unit (ICU).

Mass spectrometry was used to characterise lipids and relate them to proteins, peripheral cell immunotypes and disease severity.

Circulating phospholipases (sPLA2, cPLA2 (PLA2G4A) and PLA2G2D) were elevated on admission in all ICU groups. Cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase and epoxygenase products of arachidonic acid (AA) were elevated in all ICU groups compared with controls. sPLA2 predicted severity in COVID-19 and correlated with TxA2, LTE4 and the isoprostane, iPF2α-III, while PLA2G2D correlated with LTE4. The elevation in PGD2, like PGI2 and 12-HETE, exhibited relative specificity for COVID-19 and correlated with sPLA2 and the interleukin-13 receptor to drive lymphopenia, a marker of disease severity. Pro-inflammatory eicosanoids remained correlated with severity in COVID-19 28 days after admission. Amongst non-COVID ICU patients, elevations in 5- and 15-HETE and 9- and 13-HODE reflected viral rather than bacterial disease. Linoleic acid (LA) binds directly to SARS-CoV-2 and both LA and its di-HOME products reflected disease severity in COVID-19. In healthy marines, these lipids rose with seroconversion. Eicosanoids linked variably to the peripheral cellular immune response. PGE2, TxA2 and LTE4 correlated with T cell activation, as did PGD2 with non-B non-T cell activation. In COVID-19, LPS stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cell PGF2α correlated with memory T cells, dendritic and NK cells while LA and DiHOMEs correlated with exhausted T cells. Three high abundance lipids - ChoE 18:3, LPC-O-16:0 and PC-O-30:0 - were altered specifically in COVID. LPC-O-16:0 was strongly correlated with T helper follicular cell activation and all three negatively correlated with multi-omic inflammatory pathways and disease severity.

A broad based lipidomic storm is a predictor of poor prognosis in ARDS. Alterations in sPLA2, PGD2 and 12-HETE and the high abundance lipids, ChoE 18:3, LPC-O-16:0 and PC-O-30:0 exhibit relative specificity for COVID-19 amongst such patients and correlate with the inflammatory response to link to disease severity.

Liver injury is a strong independent predictor of mortality in patients with sepsis, in which gut dysbiosis plays a crucial role. Hydroxyl safflower yellow A (HSYA), an important component of safflower, has been used to treat liver injury in animal models. However, its role in sepsis-induced liver dysfunction and the specific molecular mechanisms remain unclear. In the current study, we first discussed the discrepancy in the gut microbiota between the cecal ligation puncture (CLP) and HSYA groups using 16 S RNA sequencing. Our data demonstrated that HSYA supplementation significantly decreased the relative abundance of Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Campylobacterota, and further decreased the abundance of Bacteroidota, suggesting that the protective effects of HSYA against sepsis-induced liver injury may be partially attributed to the alteration of these bacteria. In addition, the metabolomic data identified 823 differentially expressed metabolites associated with sepsis-induced liver injury. After HSYA supplementation, the levels of 56 metabolites were restored to sham-like levels. Transcriptomic analysis revealed 4990 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the sham and CLP groups, and after HSYA injection, 1613 genes were modulated. Comprehensive analysis demonstrated that the enrichment pathways of the 903 DEGs mainly focused on inflammatory responses, amino acid metabolism, and Lipid reactions. In conclusion, our study revealed the potential mechanism of action of HSYA in sepsis-induced liver injury through a comprehensive analysis of 16 S RNA sequencing, metabolomics, and transcriptomics, thus providing a theoretical basis for further clinical applications of HSYA.

Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by abnormal immune responses to various, predominantly bacterial, infections. Different bacterial infections lead to substantial variation in disease manifestation and therapeutic strategies. However, the underlying cellular heterogeneity and mechanisms involved remain poorly understood.

Multiple bulk transcriptome datasets from septic patients with 12 types of bacterial infections were integrated to identify signature genes for each infection. Signature genes were mapped onto an integrated large single-cell RNA (scRNA) dataset from septic patients, to identify subsets of cells associated with different sepsis types, and multiple omics datasets were combined to reveal the underlying molecular mechanisms. In addition, an scRNA dataset and spatial transcriptome data were used to identify signaling pathways in sepsis-related cells. Finally, molecular screening, optimization, and de novo design were conducted to identify potential targeted drugs and compounds.

We elucidated the cellular heterogeneity among septic patients with different bacterial infections. In Escherichia coli (E. coli) sepsis, 19 signature genes involved in epigenetic regulation and metabolism were identified, of which DRAM1 was demonstrated to promote autophagy and glycolysis in response to E. coli infection. DRAM1 upregulation was confirmed in an independent sepsis cohort. Further, we showed that DRAM1 could maintain survival of a pro-inflammatory monocyte subset, C10_ULK1, which induces systemic inflammation by interacting with other cell subsets via resistin and integrin signaling pathways in blood and kidney tissue, respectively. Finally, retapamulin was identified and optimized as a potential drug for treatment of E. coli sepsis targeting the signature gene, DRAM1, and inhibiting E. coli protein synthesis. Several other targeted drugs were also identified in other types of sepsis, including nystatin targeting C1QA in Neisseria sepsis and dalfopristin targeting CTSD in Streptococcus viridans sepsis.

Our study provides a comprehensive overview of the cellular heterogeneity and underlying mechanisms in septic patients with various bacterial infections, providing insights to inform development of stratified targeted therapies for sepsis.

Sepsis is defined as a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by the dysregulated host response to infection. It is a complex syndrome and is characterized by physiologic, pathologic and biochemical abnormalities in response to an infection. Diagnosis of sepsis is based on history, physical examination and other investigations (including biomarkers) which may help to increase the certainty of diagnosis. Biomarkers have been evaluated in the past for many diseases and have been evaluated for sepsis as well. Biomarkers may find a possible role in diagnosis, prognostication, therapeutic monitoring and anti-microbial stewardship in sepsis. Since the pathophysiology of sepsis is quite complex and is incompletely understood, a single biomarker that may be robust enough to provide all information has not been found as of yet. However, many biomarkers have been studied and some of them have applications at the bedside and guide clinical decision-making. We evaluated the PubMed database to search for sepsis biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and possible role in antibiotic escalation and de-escalation. Clinical trials, meta-analyses, systematic reviews and randomized controlled trials were included. Commonly studied biomarkers such as procalcitonin, Soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator (Supar), presepsin, soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1, interleukin 6, C-reactive protein, etc., have been described for their possible applications as biomarkers in septic patients. The sepsis biomarkers are still an area of active research with newer evidence adding to the knowledge base continuously. For patients presenting with sepsis, early diagnosis and prompt resuscitation and early administration of anti-microbials (preferably within 1 h) and source control are desired goals. Biomarkers may help us in the diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic monitoring of septic patients. The marker redefining our view on sepsis is yet a mirage that clinicians and researchers continue to chase.

Precision medicine aims to identify treatments that are most likely to result in favorable outcomes for subgroups of patients with similar clinical and biological characteristics. The gaps for the development and implementation of precision medicine strategies in the critical care setting are many, but the advent of data science and multi-omics approaches, combined with the rich data ecosystem in the intensive care unit, offer unprecedented opportunities to realize the promise of precision critical care. In this article, the authors review the data-driven and technology-based approaches being leveraged to discover and implement precision medicine strategies in the critical care setting.

The immune response to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection in COVID-19 patients has been extensively investigated. However, much less is known about the long-term effects of infection in patients and how it could affect the immune system and its capacity to respond to future perturbations.

Using a targeted single-cell multiomics approach, we have recently identified a prolonged anti-inflammatory gene expression signature in T and NK cells in type 1 diabetes patients treated with low-dose IL-2. Here, we investigated the dynamics of this signature in three independent cohorts of COVID-19 patients: (i) the Oxford COVID-19 Multi-omics Blood Atlas (COMBAT) dataset, a cross-sectional cohort including 77 COVID-19 patients and ten healthy donors; (ii) the INCOV dataset, consisting of 525 samples taken from 209 COVID-19 patients during and after infection; and (iii) a longitudinal dataset consisting of 269 whole-blood samples taken from 139 COVID-19 patients followed for a period of up to 7 months after the onset of symptoms using a bulk transcriptomic approach.

We discovered that SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to a prolonged alteration of the gene expression profile of circulating T, B and NK cells and monocytes. Some of the genes affected were the same as those present in the IL-2-induced anti-inflammatory gene expression signature but were regulated in the opposite direction, implying a pro-inflammatory status. The altered transcriptional profile was detected in COVID-19 patients for at least 2 months after the onset of the disease symptoms but was not observed in response to influenza infection or sepsis. Gene network analysis suggested a central role for the transcriptional factor NF-κB in the regulation of the observed transcriptional alterations.

SARS-CoV-2 infection causes a prolonged increase in the pro-inflammatory transcriptional status that could predispose post-acute patients to the development of long-term health consequences, including autoimmune disease, reactivation of other viruses and disruption of the host immune system-microbiome ecosystem.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) can cause severe acute infections, including pneumonia and sepsis, and cause chronic infections, commonly in patients with structural respiratory diseases. However, the molecular and pathophysiological mechanisms of P. aeruginosa respiratory infection are largely unknown. Here, we performed assays for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq), transcriptomics, and quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues for multi-omics analysis, while ATAC-seq and transcriptomics were also examined in P. aeruginosa-infected mouse macrophages. To identify the pivotal factors that are involved in host immune defense, we integrated chromatin accessibility and gene expression to investigate molecular changes in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues combined with proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics. Our multi-omics investigation discovered a significant concordance for innate immunological and inflammatory responses following P. aeruginosa infection between hosts and alveolar macrophages. Furthermore, we discovered that multi-omics changes in pioneer factors Stat1 and Stat3 play a crucial role in the immunological regulation of P. aeruginosa infection and that their downstream molecules (e.g., Fas) may be implicated in both immunosuppressive and inflammation-promoting processes. Taken together, these findings indicate that transcription factors and their downstream signaling molecules play a critical role in the mobilization and rebalancing of the host immune response against P. aeruginosa infection and may serve as potential targets for bacterial infections and inflammatory diseases, providing insights and resources for omics analyses.

Neonatal sepsis is a bacterial bloodstream infection leading to severe clinical manifestations frequently associated with death or irreversible long-term deficits. Antibiotics are the drug of choice to treat sepsis, regardless of age. In neonates, the lack of reliable criteria for a definite diagnosis and the supposition that an early antibiotic administration could reduce sepsis development in children at risk have led to a relevant antibiotic overuse for both prevention and therapy. The availability of biomarkers of neonatal sepsis that could alert the physician to an early diagnosis of neonatal sepsis could improve the short and long-term outcomes of true sepsis cases and reduce the indiscriminate and deleterious use of preventive antibiotics. The main aim of this narrative review is to summarize the main results in this regard and to detail the accuracy of currently used biomarkers for the early diagnosis of neonatal sepsis. Literature analysis showed that, despite intense research, the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis and the conduct of antibiotic therapy cannot be at present decided on the basis of a single biomarker. Given the importance of the problem and the need to reduce the abuse of antibiotics, further studies are urgently required. However, instead of looking for new biomarkers, it seems easier and more productive to test combinations of two or more of the presently available biomarkers. Moreover, studies based on omics technologies should be strongly boosted. However, while waiting for new information, the use of the clinical scores prepared by some scientific institutions could be suggested. Based on maternal risk factors and infant clinical indicators, sepsis risk can be calculated, and a significant reduction in antibiotic consumption can be obtained.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) affects increasing numbers of in-hospital patients in Central Europe and the USA, the prognosis remains poor. Although substantial progress has been achieved in the identification of molecular/cellular processes that induce and perpetuate AKI, more integrated pathophysiological perspectives are missing. Metabolomics enables the identification of low-molecular-weight (< 1.5 kD) substances from biological specimens such as certain types of fluid or tissue. The aim of the article was to review the literature on metabolic profiling in experimental AKI and to answer the question if metabolomics allows the integration of distinct pathophysiological events such as tubulopathy and microvasculopathy in ischemic and toxic AKI. The following databases were searched for references: PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, Scopus. The period lasted from 1940 until 2022. The following terms were utilized: "acute kidney injury" OR "acute renal failure" OR "AKI" AND "metabolomics" OR "metabolic profiling" OR "omics" AND "ischemic" OR "toxic" OR "drug-induced" OR "sepsis" OR "LPS" OR "cisplatin" OR "cardiorenal" OR "CRS" AND "mouse" OR "mice" OR "murine" OR "rats" OR "rat". Additional search terms were "cardiac surgery", "cardiopulmonary bypass", "pig", "dog", and "swine". In total, 13 studies were identified. Five studies were related to ischemic, seven studies to toxic (lipopolysaccharide (LPS), cisplatin), and one study to heat shock-associated AKI. Only one study, related to cisplatin-induced AKI, was performed as a targeted analysis. The majority of the studies identified multiple metabolic deteriorations upon ischemia/the administration of LPS or cisplatin (e.g., amino acid, glucose, lipid metabolism). Particularly, abnormalities in the lipid homeostasis were shown under almost all experimental conditions. LPS-induced AKI most likely depends on the alterations in the tryptophan metabolism. Metabolomics studies provide a deeper understanding of pathophysiological links between distinct processes that are responsible for functional impairment/structural damage in ischemic or toxic or other types of AKI.

Staphylococcus aureus is the leading cause of hospital-acquired infections and can cause a wide range of diseases from mild skin infections to invasive diseases including deep surgical site infections, life-threatening bacteremia, and sepsis. This pathogen remains a challenge to manage due to its ability to rapidly develop resistance to antibiotic treatment and to form biofilms. Despite the current infection control measures which involve mainly antibiotics, the burden of infection remains high. The 'omics' approaches have not led to the discovery of novel antibacterials at a pace sufficient to cope with the emergence of multidrug-resistant and biofilm-forming S. aureus, Hence, new strategies for anti-infective therapies need to be explored urgently. One promising strategy is harnessing the immune response to enhance the protective antimicrobial immunity in the host. This review discusses the potential of monoclonal antibodies and vaccines as alternatives to treat and manage infections caused by planktonic and biofilms of S. aureus.

It is evident that the admission of some patients with sepsis and septic shock to hospitals is occurring late in their illness, which has contributed to the increase in poor outcomes and high fatalities worldwide across age groups. The current diagnostic and monitoring procedure relies on an inaccurate and often delayed identification by the clinician, who then decides the treatment upon interaction with the patient. Initiation of sepsis is accompanied by immune system paralysis following "cytokine storm". The unique immunological response of each patient is important to define in terms of subtyping for therapy. The immune system becomes activated in sepsis to produce interleukins, and endothelial cells express higher levels of adhesion molecules. The proportions of circulating immune cells change, reducing regulatory cells and increasing memory cells and killer cells, having long-term effects on the phenotype of CD8 T cells, HLA-DR, and dysregulation of microRNA. The current narrative review seeks to highlight the potential application of multi-omics data integration and immunological profiling at the single-cell level to define endotypes in sepsis and septic shock. The review will consider the parallels and immunoregulatory axis between cancer and immunosuppression, sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy, and endothelial damage. Second, the added value of transcriptomic-driven endotypes will be assessed through inferring regulatory interactions in recent clinical trials and studies reporting gene modular features that inform continuous metrics measuring clinical response in ICU, which can support the use of immunomodulating agents.

Sepsis is a dysfunctional host response to infection. The syndrome leads to millions of deaths annually (19.7% of all deaths in 2017) and is the cause of most deaths from severe Covid infections. High throughput sequencing or 'omics' experiments in molecular and clinical sepsis research have been widely utilized to identify new diagnostics and therapies. Transcriptomics, quantifying gene expression, has dominated these studies, due to the efficiency of measuring gene expression in tissues and the technical accuracy of technologies like RNA-Seq.

Most of these studies seek to uncover novel mechanistic insights into sepsis pathogenesis and diagnostic gene signatures by identifying genes differentially expressed between two or more relevant conditions. However, little effort has been made, to date, to aggregate this knowledge from such studies. In this study we sought to build a compendium of previously described gene sets that combines knowledge gained from sepsis-associated studies. This would enable the identification of genes most associated with sepsis pathogenesis, and the description of the molecular pathways commonly associated with sepsis.

PubMed was searched for studies using transcriptomics to characterize acute infection/sepsis and severe sepsis (i.e., sepsis combined with organ failure). Several studies were identified that used transcriptomics to identify differentially expressed (DE) genes, predictive/prognostic signatures, and underlying molecular responses and pathways. The molecules included in each gene set were collected, in addition to the relevant study metadata (e.g., patient groups used for comparison, sample collection time point, tissue type, etc.).

After performing extensive literature curation of 74 sepsis-related publications involving transcriptomics, 103 unique gene sets (comprising 20,899 unique genes) from thousands of patients were collated together with associated metadata. Frequently described genes included in gene sets as well as the molecular mechanisms they were involved in were identified. These mechanisms included neutrophil degranulation, generation of second messenger molecules, IL-4 and -13 signaling, and IL-10 signaling among many others. The database, which we named SeptiSearch, is made available in a web application created using the Shiny framework in R, (available at https://septisearch.ca).

SeptiSearch provides members of the sepsis community the bioinformatic tools needed to leverage and explore the gene sets contained in the database. This will allow the gene sets to be further scrutinized and analyzed for their enrichment in user-submitted gene expression data and used for validation of in-house gene sets/signatures.

Clostridioides difficile (CD) is a major planetary health burden. A Gram-positive opportunistic pathogen, CD, colonizes the large intestine and is implicated in sepsis, pseudomembranous colitis, and colorectal cancer. C. difficile infection typically following antibiotic exposure results in dysbiosis of the gut microbiome, and is one of the leading causes of diarrhea in the elderly population. While several studies have focused on the toxigenic strains of CD, gut commensals such as Clostridium butyricum (CB) and Clostridium tertium (CT) could harbor toxin/virulence genes, and thus pose a threat to human health. In this study, we sequenced and characterized three isolates, namely, CT (MALS001), CB (MALS002), and CD (MALS003) for their antimicrobial, cytotoxic, antiproliferative, genomic, and proteomic profiles. Although in vitro cytotoxic and antiproliferative potential were observed predominantly in CD MALS003, genome analysis revealed pathogenic potential of CB MALS002 and CT MALS001. Pangenome analysis revealed the presence of several accessory genes typically involved in fitness, virulence, and resistance characteristics in the core genomes of sequenced strains. The presence of an array of virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes in CB MALS002 and CT MALS001 suggests their potential role as emerging pathogens with significant impact on planetary health.

The cascade of immune responses involves activation of diverse immune cells and release of a large amount of cytokines, which leads to either normal, balanced inflammation or hyperinflammatory responses and even organ damage by sepsis. Conventional diagnosis of immunological disorders based on multiple cytokines in the blood serum has varied accuracy, and it is difficult to distinguish normal inflammation from sepsis. Herein, we present an approach to detect immunological disorders through rapid, ultrahigh-multiplex analysis of T cells using single-cell multiplex in situ tagging (scMIST) technology. scMIST permits simultaneous detection of 46 markers and cytokines from single cells without the assistance of special instruments. A cecal ligation and puncture sepsis model was built to supply T cells from two groups of mice that survived the surgery or died after 1 day. The scMIST assays have captured the T cell features and the dynamics over the course of recovery. Compared with cytokines in the peripheral blood, T cell markers show different dynamics and cytokine levels. We have applied a random forest machine learning model to single T cells from two groups of mice. Through training, the model has been able to predict the group of mice through T cell classification and majority rule with 94% accuracy. Our approach pioneers the direction of single-cell omics and could be widely applicable to human diseases.

The recently developed technologies that allow the analysis of each single omics have provided an unbiased insight into ongoing disease processes. However, it remains challenging to specify the study design for the subsequent integration strategies that can associate sepsis pathophysiology and clinical outcomes. Here, we conducted a time-dependent multi-omics integration (TDMI) in a sepsis-associated liver dysfunction (SALD) model. We successfully deduced the relation of the toll-like receptor (TLR4) pathway with SALD. Although TLR4 is a critical factor in sepsis progression, it is not specified in single omics results but only in the TDMI analysis. This result indicates that the TDMI-based approach is more advantageous than single omics analysis in terms of exploring the underlying pathophysiological mechanism of this disease. Furthermore, this approach can be an ideal paradigm for insightful biological interpretations of multi-omics datasets that will potentially reveal novel insights into basic biology, health, and diseases, thus allowing the identification of promising candidates for therapeutic strategies.

Dachaihu decoction (DCH), a classic formula for Yangming and Shaoyang Syndrome Complex recorded in "Treatise on Cold Damage", has been widely used in treating intestinal disorders and inflammatory diseases with few side effects in China. However, the mechanism of DCH on septic intestinal injury (SII) remains to be explored.

This study aimed to clarify the mechanism of DCH on SII.

SII model of rat, established by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP), was used to study the effect of DCH on SII. 24 h mortality was recorded. Histological changes were observed by H&E staining. The expression of tight junction protein ZO-1 (ZO-1) and mucin2 (MUC2) was determined by immunohistochemical analysis. Secretory IgA (sIgA), diamine oxidase (DAO) and intestinal fatty acid binding protein (iFABP) were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α were measured by ELISA and quantitative Real-time PCR (RT-qPCR). The gut microbiota was analyzed by 16S rRNA sequencing. The potential targets and pathways of DCH in treating SII were analyzed by integrative analysis of transcriptomic and metabolomic methods. Total glutathione (T-GSH), GSH, GSSG (reduced form of GSH), GSH peroxidase (GPX), superoxide dismutase (SOD), malonaldehyde (MDA) and indicators of hepatic and renal function were measured by biochemical kits.

Medium dose of DCH improved 24 h mortality of SII rats, reduced the pathological changes of ileum, and increased the expression levels of ZO-1, MUC2 and sIgA. DCH decreased DAO, iFABP of serum and IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α of ileum. DCH improved α- and β-diversity and modulated the structure of gut microbiota, with Escherichia_Shigella decreased and Bacteroides and Ruminococcus increased. GSH metabolism was identified as the key pathway of DCH on SII by integrative analysis of transcriptome and metabolome. GSH/GSSG and the most common indicators of oxidative stress, were validated. Antioxidative T-GSH, GSH, GPX and SOD were increased, while MDA, the mark of lipid peroxidation was downregulated by DCH. Eventually, DCH was proved to be safe and hepato- and nephro-protective.

DCH ameliorated septic intestinal injury possibly by modulating the gut microbiota and enhancing glutathione metabolism of SII rats, without hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity.

Sepsis is a heterogeneous disease, therefore the single-gene-based biomarker is not sufficient to fully understand the disease. Higher-level biomarkers need to be explored to identify important pathways related to sepsis and evaluate their clinical significance.

Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was used to analyze the sepsis transcriptome to obtain the pathway-level expression. Limma was used to identify differentially expressed pathways. Tumor IMmune Estimation Resource (TIMER) was applied to estimate immune cell abundance. The Spearman correlation coefficient was used to find the relationships between pathways and immune cell abundance. Methylation and single-cell transcriptome data were also employed to identify important pathway genes. Log-rank test was performed to test the prognostic significance of pathways for patient survival probability. DSigDB was used to mine candidate drugs based on pathways. PyMol was used for 3-D structure visualization. LigPlot was used to plot the 2-D pose view for receptor-ligand interaction.

Eighty-four KEGG pathways were differentially expressed in sepsis patients compared to healthy controls. Of those, 10 pathways were associated with 28-day survival. Some pathways were significantly correlated with immune cell abundance and five pathways could be used to distinguish between systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), bacterial sepsis, and viral sepsis with Area Under the Curve (AUC) above 0.80. Seven related drugs were screened using survival-related pathways.

Sepsis-related pathways can be utilized for disease subtyping, diagnosis, prognosis, and drug screening.

Bloodstream infection (BSI) is a serious hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) complication. The intestinal microbiome regulates host metabolism and maintains intestinal homeostasis. Thus, the impact of microbiome on HSCT patients with BSI is essential.

Stool and serum specimens of HSCT patients were prospectively collected from the pretransplant conditioning period till 4 months after transplantation. Specimens of 16 patients without BSI and 21 patients before BSI onset were screened for omics study using 16S rRNA gene sequencing and untargeted metabolomics. The predictive infection model was constructed using LASSO and the logistic regression algorithm. The correlation and influence of microbiome and metabolism were examined in mouse and Caco-2 cell monolayer models.

The microbial diversity and abundance of Lactobacillaceae were remarkably reduced, but the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae (especially Klebsiella quasipneumoniae) was significantly increased in the BSI group before onset, compared with the non-BSI group. The family score of microbiome features (Enterobacteriaceae and Butyricicoccaceae) could highly predict BSI (AUC = 0.879). The serum metabolomic analysis showed that 16 differential metabolites were mainly enriched in the primary bile acid biosynthesis pathway, and the level of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) was positively correlated with the abundance of K. quasipneumoniae (R = 0.406, P = 0.006). The results of mouse experiments confirmed that three serum primary bile acids levels (cholic acid, isoCDCA and ursocholic acid), the mRNA expression levels of bile acid farnesol X receptor gene and apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter gene in K. quasipneumoniae colonized mice were significantly higher than those in non-colonized mice. The intestinal villus height, crypt depth, and the mRNA expression level of tight junction protein claudin-1 gene in K. quasipneumoniae intestinal colonized mice were significantly lower than those in non-colonized mice. In vitro, K. quasipneumoniae increased the clearance of FITC-dextran by Caco-2 cell monolayer.

This study demonstrated that the intestinal opportunistic pathogen, K. quasipneumoniae, was increased in HSCT patients before BSI onset, causing increased serum primary bile acids. The colonization of K. quasipneumoniae in mice intestines could lead to mucosal integrity damage. The intestinal microbiome features of HSCT patients were highly predictive of BSI and could be further used as potential biomarkers.

Diagnostics require precision and predictive ability to be clinically useful. Integration of multi-omic with clinical data is crucial to our understanding of disease pathogenesis and diagnosis. However, interpretation of overwhelming amounts of information at the individual level requires sophisticated computational tools for extraction of clinically meaningful outputs. Moreover, evolution of technical and analytical methods often outpaces standardisation strategies. RNA is the most dynamic component of all -omics technologies carrying an abundance of regulatory information that is least harnessed for use in clinical diagnostics. Gene expression-based tests capture genetic and non-genetic heterogeneity and have been implemented in certain diseases. For example patients with early breast cancer are spared toxic unnecessary treatments with scores based on the expression of a set of genes (e.g., Oncotype DX). The ability of transcriptomics to portray the transcriptional status at a moment in time has also been used in diagnosis of dynamic diseases such as sepsis. Gene expression profiles identify endotypes in sepsis patients with prognostic value and a potential to discriminate between viral and bacterial infection. The application of transcriptomics for patient stratification in clinical environments and clinical trials thus holds promise. In this review, we discuss the current clinical application in the fields of cancer and infection. We use these paradigms to highlight the impediments in identifying useful diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and propose approaches to overcome them and aid efforts towards clinical implementation.

Even in the setting of optimal resuscitation in high-income countries severe sepsis and septic shock have a mortality of 20-40%, with antibiotic resistance dramatically increasing this mortality risk. To develop a reference dataset enabling the identification of common bacterial targets for therapeutic intervention, we applied a standardized genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic technological framework to multiple clinical isolates of four sepsis-causing pathogens: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae species complex, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes. Exposure to human serum generated a sepsis molecular signature containing global increases in fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis and metabolism, consistent with cell envelope remodelling and nutrient adaptation for osmoprotection. In addition, acquisition of cholesterol was identified across the bacterial species. This detailed reference dataset has been established as an open resource to support discovery and translational research.

Current guidelines for critically ill patients use broad recommendations to promote uniform protocols for the management of conditions such as acute kidney injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and sepsis. Although these guidelines have enabled the substantial improvement of care, mortality for critical illness remains high. Further outcome improvement may require personalizing care for critically ill patients, which involves tailoring management strategies for different patients. However, the current understanding of disease heterogeneity is limited. For critically ill patients, genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics have illuminated such heterogeneity and unveiled novel biomarkers, giving clinicians new means of diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring. With further engineering and economic development, omics would then be more accessible and affordable for frontline clinicians. As the knowledge of pathophysiological pathways mature, targeted treatments can then be developed, validated, replicated, and translated into clinical practice.

Sepsis is a life-threatening condition caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. Despite continued efforts to understand the pathophysiology of sepsis, no effective therapies are currently available. While singular components of the aberrant immune response have been investigated, comprehensive studies linking different data layers are lacking. Using an integrated systems immunology approach, we evaluated neutrophil phenotypes and concomitant changes in cytokines and metabolites in patients with sepsis. Our findings identify differentially expressed mature and immature neutrophil subsets in patients with sepsis. These subsets correlate with various proteins, metabolites, and lipids, including pentraxin-3, angiopoietin-2, and lysophosphatidylcholines, in patients with sepsis. These results enabled the construction of a statistical model based on weighted multi-omics linear regression analysis for sepsis biomarker identification. These findings could help inform early patient stratification and treatment options, and facilitate further mechanistic studies targeting the trifecta of surface marker expression, cytokines, and metabolites.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a life-threatening condition during critical illness, is a common complication of COVID-19. It can originate from various disease etiologies, including severe infections, major injury, or inhalation of irritants. ARDS poses substantial clinical challenges due to a lack of etiology-specific therapies, multisystem involvement, and heterogeneous, poor patient outcomes. A molecular comparison of ARDS groups holds the potential to reveal common and distinct mechanisms underlying ARDS pathogenesis.

We performed a comparative analysis of urine-based metabolomics and proteomics profiles from COVID-19 ARDS patients (n = 42) and bacterial sepsis-induced ARDS patients (n = 17). To this end, we used two different approaches, first we compared the molecular omics profiles between ARDS groups, and second, we correlated clinical manifestations within each group with the omics profiles.

The comparison of the two ARDS etiologies identified 150 metabolites and 70 proteins that were differentially abundant between the two groups. Based on these findings, we interrogated the interplay of cell adhesion/extracellular matrix molecules, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ARDS pathogenesis through a multi-omic network approach. Moreover, we identified a proteomic signature associated with mortality in COVID-19 ARDS patients, which contained several proteins that had previously been implicated in clinical manifestations frequently linked with ARDS pathogenesis.

In summary, our results provide evidence for significant molecular differences in ARDS patients from different etiologies and a potential synergy of extracellular matrix molecules, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ARDS pathogenesis. The proteomic mortality signature should be further investigated in future studies to develop prediction models for COVID-19 patient outcomes.

The intensive care unit is a center for massive data collection, making it the best field to embrace big data and artificial intelligence.

This study aimed to provide a literature overview on the development of artificial intelligence in critical care medicine (CCM) and tried to give valuable information about further precision medicine.

Relevant studies published between January 2010 and June 2021 were manually retrieved from the Science Citation Index Expanded database in Web of Science (Clarivate), using keywords.

Research related to artificial intelligence in CCM has been increasing over the years. The USA published the most articles and had the top 10 active affiliations. The top ten active journals are bioinformatics journals and are in JCR Q1. Prediction, diagnosis, and treatment strategy exploration of sepsis, pneumonia, and acute kidney injury were the most focused topics. Electronic health records (EHRs) were the most widely used data and the "-omics" data should be integrated further.

Artificial intelligence in CCM has developed over the past decade. With the introduction of constantly growing data volume and novel data types, more investigation on artificial intelligence ethics and model correctness and extrapolation should be performed for generalization.

Early detection, timely diagnosis and rapid response are essential for case management and precautions of burn-associated sepsis. However, studies on indicators for early warning and intervention have rarely been conducted. This study was performed to better understand the pathophysiological changes and targets for prevention of severe burn injuries.

We conducted a multi-center, prospective multi-omics study, including genomics, microRNAomics, proteomics and single-cell transcriptomics, in 60 patients with severe burn injuries. A mouse model of severe burn injuries was also constructed to verify the early warning ability and therapeutic effects of potential markers.

Through genomic analysis, we identified seven important susceptibility genes (DNAH11, LAMA2, ABCA2, ZFAND4, CEP290, MUC20 and ENTPD1) in patients with severe burn injuries complicated with sepsis. Through plasma miRNAomics studies, we identified four miRNAs (hsa-miR-16-5p, hsa-miR-185-5p, hsa-miR-451a and hsa-miR-423-5p) that may serve as early warning markers of burn-associated sepsis. A proteomic study indicated the changes in abundance of major proteins at different time points after severe burn injury and revealed the candidate early warning markers S100A8 and SERPINA10. In addition, the proteomic analysis indicated that neutrophils play an important role in the pathogenesis of severe burn injuries, as also supported by findings from single-cell transcriptome sequencing of neutrophils. Through further studies on severely burned mice, we determined that S100A8 is also a potential early therapeutic target for severe burn injuries, beyond being an early warning indicator.

Our multi-omics study identified seven susceptibility genes, four miRNAs and two proteins as early warning markers for severe burn-associated sepsis. In severe burn-associated sepsis, the protein S100A8 has both warning and therapeutic effects.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or endotoxin, the major cell wall component of Gram-negative bacteria, plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of sepsis. It is able to activate the host defense system through interaction with Toll-like receptor 4, thus triggering pro-inflammatory mechanisms. A large amount of LPS induces inappropriate activation of the immune system, triggering an exaggerated inflammatory response and consequent extensive organ injury, providing the basis of sepsis damage. In this review, we will briefly describe endotoxin's molecular structure and its main pathogenetic action during sepsis. In addition, we will summarize the main different available methods for endotoxin detection with a special focus on the wider spectrum offered by omics technologies (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics) and promising applications of these in the identification of specific biomarkers for sepsis.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-to-cell communication and contribute toward homeostasis under physiological conditions. But EVs can also contribute toward a wide array of pathophysiology like cancer, sepsis, sickle cell disease, and thrombotic disorders. COVID-19 infected patients are at an increased risk of aberrant coagulation, consistent with elevated circulating levels of ultra-high molecular weight VWF multimers, D-dimer and procoagulant EVs. The role of EVs in COVID-19 related hemostasis may depend on cells of origin, vesicular cargo and size, however this is not well defined. We hypothesized that the procoagulant potential of EV isolates from COVID-19 (+) patient plasmas could be defined by thrombin generation assays. Here we isolated small EVs (SEVs) and large EVs (LEVs) from hospitalized COVID-19 (+) patient (n = 21) and healthy donor (n = 20) plasmas. EVs were characterized by flow cytometry, Transmission electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis, plasma thrombin generation and a multi-omics approach to define coagulation potential. These data were consistent with differences in EV metabolite, lipid, and protein content when compared to healthy donor plasma isolated SEVs and LEVs. Taken together, the effect of EVs on plasma procoagulant potential as defined by thrombin generation and supported by multi-omics is enhanced in COVID-19. Further, we observe that this effect is driven both by EV size and phosphatidyl serine.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common complication in sepsis. However, the trajectories of sepsis-induced AKI and their transcriptional profiles are not well characterized.

Sepsis patients admitted to centres participating in Chinese Multi-omics Advances In Sepsis (CMAISE) from November 2020 to December 2021 were enrolled, and gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was measured on Day 1. The renal function trajectory was measured by the renal component of the SOFA score (SOFArenal) on Days 1 and 3. Transcriptional profiles on Day 1 were compared between these renal function trajectories, and a support vector machine (SVM) was developed to distinguish transient from persistent AKI.

A total of 172 sepsis patients were enrolled during the study period. The renal function trajectory was classified into four types: non-AKI (SOFArenal = 0 on Days 1 and 3, n = 50), persistent AKI (SOFArenal > 0 on Days 1 and 3, n = 62), transient AKI (SOFArenal > 0 on Day 1 and SOFArenal = 0 on Day 3, n = 50) and worsening AKI (SOFArenal = 0 on Days 1 and SOFArenal > 0 on Day 3, n = 10). The persistent AKI group showed severe organ dysfunction and prolonged requirements for organ support. The worsening AKI group showed the least organ dysfunction on day 1 but had higher serum lactate and prolonged use of vasopressors than the non-AKI and transient AKI groups. There were 2091 upregulated and 1,902 downregulated genes (adjusted p < 0.05) between the persistent and transient AKI groups, with enrichment in the plasma membrane complex, receptor complex, and T-cell receptor complex. A 43-gene SVM model was developed using the genetic algorithm, which showed significantly greater performance predicting persistent AKI than the model based on clinical variables in a holdout subset (AUC: 0.948 [0.912, 0.984] vs. 0.739 [0.648, 0.830]; p < 0.01 for Delong's test).

Our study identified four subtypes of sepsis-induced AKI based on kidney injury trajectories. The landscape of host response aberrations across these subtypes was characterized. An SVM model based on a gene signature was developed to predict renal function trajectories, and showed better performance than the clinical variable-based model. Future studies are warranted to validate the gene model in distinguishing persistent from transient AKI.

Heterogeneity in sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is increasingly being recognized as one of the principal barriers to finding efficacious targeted therapies. The advent of multiple high-throughput biological data ("omics"), coupled with the widespread access to increased computational power, has led to the emergence of phenotyping in critical care. Phenotyping aims to use a multitude of data to identify homogenous subgroups within an otherwise heterogenous population. Increasingly, phenotyping schemas are being applied to sepsis and ARDS to increase understanding of these clinical conditions and identify potential therapies. Here we present a selective review of the biological phenotyping schemas applied to sepsis and ARDS. Further, we outline some of the challenges involved in translating these conceptual findings to bedside clinical decision-making tools.

The search for new biomarkers that allow an early diagnosis in sepsis and predict its evolution has become a necessity in medicine. The objective of this study is to identify, through omics techniques, potential protein biomarkers that are expressed in patients with sepsis and their relationship with organ dysfunction and mortality.

Prospective, observational and single-center study that included adult patients (≥ 18 years) who were admitted to a tertiary hospital and who met the criteria for sepsis. A mass spectrometry-based approach was used to analyze the plasma proteins in the enrolled subjects. Subsequently, using recursive feature elimination classification and cross-validation with a vector classifier, an association of these proteins with mortality and organ dysfunction was established. The protein-protein interaction network was analyzed with String software.

141 patients were enrolled in this study. Mass spectrometry identified 177 proteins. Of all of them, and by recursive feature elimination, nine proteins (GPX3, APOB, ORM1, SERPINF1, LYZ, C8A, CD14, APOC3 and C1QC) were associated with organ dysfunction (SOFA > 6) with an accuracy of 0.82 ± 0.06, precision of 0.85 ± 0.093, sensitivity 0.81 ± 0.10, specificity 0.84 ± 0.10 and AUC 0.82 ± 0.06. Twenty-two proteins (CLU, LUM, APOL1, SAA1, CLEBC3B, C8A, ITIH4, KNG1, AGT, C7, SAA2, APOH, HRG, AFM, APOE, APOC1, C1S, SERPINC1, IGFALS, KLKB1, CFB and BTD) were associated with mortality with an accuracy of 0.86 ± 0.05, a precision of 0.91 ± 0.05, a sensitivity of 0.91 ± 0.05, a specificity of 0.72 ± 0.17, and an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.81 ± 0.08 with a confidence interval of 95%.

In sepsis there are proteomic patterns associated with organ dysfunction and mortality.

Necrotizing soft tissue infections (NSTIs) are complex multifactorial diseases characterized by rapid bacterial proliferation and progressive tissue death. Treatment is multidisciplinary, including surgery, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and intensive care; adjunctive treatment with hyperbaric oxygen (HBO2) may also be applied. Recent advances in molecular technology and biological computation have given rise to new approaches to infectious diseases based on identifying target groups defined by activated pathophysiological mechanisms.

We aim to capture NSTI disease signatures and mechanisms and responses to treatment in patients that receive the highest standard of care; therefore, we set out to investigate genome-wide transcriptional responses to HBO2 treatment during NSTI in the host and bacteria.

The Effects of Hyperbaric Oxygen Treatment Studied with Omics (HBOmic) study is a prospective cohort study including 95 patients admitted for NSTI at the intensive care unit of Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Denmark, between January 2013 and June 2017. All participants were treated according to a local protocol for management of NSTI, and biological samples were obtained and stored according to a standard operational procedure. In the proposed study, we will generate genome-wide expression profiles of whole-blood samples and samples of infected tissue taken before and after HBO2 treatment administered during the initial acute phase of infection, and we will analyze the profiles with unsupervised hierarchical clustering and machine learning. Differential gene expression will be compared in samples taken before and after HBO2 treatment (N=85), and integration of profiles from blood and tissue samples will be performed. Furthermore, findings will be compared to NSTI patients who did not receive HBO2 treatment (N=10). Transcriptomic data will be integrated with clinical data to investigate associations and predictors.

The first participant was enrolled on July 27, 2021, and data analysis is expected to begin during autumn 2022, with publication of results immediately thereafter.

The HBOmic study will provide new insights into personalized patient management in NSTIs.

ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01790698; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01790698.

DERR1-10.2196/39252.

Reducing the burden of death due to infection is an urgent global public health priority. Previous studies have estimated the number of deaths associated with drug-resistant infections and sepsis and found that infections remain a leading cause of death globally. Understanding the global burden of common bacterial pathogens (both susceptible and resistant to antimicrobials) is essential to identify the greatest threats to public health. To our knowledge, this is the first study to present global comprehensive estimates of deaths associated with 33 bacterial pathogens across 11 major infectious syndromes.

We estimated deaths associated with 33 bacterial genera or species across 11 infectious syndromes in 2019 using methods from the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD) 2019, in addition to a subset of the input data described in the Global Burden of Antimicrobial Resistance 2019 study. This study included 343 million individual records or isolates covering 11 361 study-location-years. We used three modelling steps to estimate the number of deaths associated with each pathogen: deaths in which infection had a role, the fraction of deaths due to infection that are attributable to a given infectious syndrome, and the fraction of deaths due to an infectious syndrome that are attributable to a given pathogen. Estimates were produced for all ages and for males and females across 204 countries and territories in 2019. 95% uncertainty intervals (UIs) were calculated for final estimates of deaths and infections associated with the 33 bacterial pathogens following standard GBD methods by taking the 2·5th and 97·5th percentiles across 1000 posterior draws for each quantity of interest.

From an estimated 13·7 million (95% UI 10·9-17·1) infection-related deaths in 2019, there were 7·7 million deaths (5·7-10·2) associated with the 33 bacterial pathogens (both resistant and susceptible to antimicrobials) across the 11 infectious syndromes estimated in this study. We estimated deaths associated with the 33 bacterial pathogens to comprise 13·6% (10·2-18·1) of all global deaths and 56·2% (52·1-60·1) of all sepsis-related deaths in 2019. Five leading pathogens-Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa-were responsible for 54·9% (52·9-56·9) of deaths among the investigated bacteria. The deadliest infectious syndromes and pathogens varied by location and age. The age-standardised mortality rate associated with these bacterial pathogens was highest in the sub-Saharan Africa super-region, with 230 deaths (185-285) per 100 000 population, and lowest in the high-income super-region, with 52·2 deaths (37·4-71·5) per 100 000 population. S aureus was the leading bacterial cause of death in 135 countries and was also associated with the most deaths in individuals older than 15 years, globally. Among children younger than 5 years, S pneumoniae was the pathogen associated with the most deaths. In 2019, more than 6 million deaths occurred as a result of three bacterial infectious syndromes, with lower respiratory infections and bloodstream infections each causing more than 2 million deaths and peritoneal and intra-abdominal infections causing more than 1 million deaths.

The 33 bacterial pathogens that we investigated in this study are a substantial source of health loss globally, with considerable variation in their distribution across infectious syndromes and locations. Compared with GBD Level 3 underlying causes of death, deaths associated with these bacteria would rank as the second leading cause of death globally in 2019; hence, they should be considered an urgent priority for intervention within the global health community. Strategies to address the burden of bacterial infections include infection prevention, optimised use of antibiotics, improved capacity for microbiological analysis, vaccine development, and improved and more pervasive use of available vaccines. These estimates can be used to help set priorities for vaccine need, demand, and development.

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Wellcome Trust, and Department of Health and Social Care, using UK aid funding managed by the Fleming Fund.

Sepsis is a major health issue and a leading cause of death in hospitals globally. The treatment of sepsis is largely supportive, and there are no therapeutics available that target the underlying pathophysiology of the disease. The development of therapeutics for the treatment of sepsis is hindered by the heterogeneous nature of the disease. The presence of multiple, distinct immune phenotypes ranging from hyperimmune to immunosuppressed can significantly impact the host response to infection. Recently, omics, biomarkers, cell surface protein expression, and immune cell profiles have been used to classify immune status of sepsis patients. However, there has been limited studies of immune cell function during sepsis and even fewer correlating omics and biomarker alterations to functional consequences. In this review, we will discuss how the heterogeneity of sepsis and associated immune cell phenotypes result from changes in the omic makeup of cells and its correlation with leukocyte dysfunction. We will also discuss how emerging techniques such as in silico modeling and machine learning can help in phenotyping sepsis patients leading to precision medicine.

Advances in our understanding of the nature of the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, and how this varies within and between individuals, is important in efforts to develop targeted therapies and precision medicine approaches. Here we present a database for the COvid-19 Multi-omics Blood ATlas (COMBAT) project, COMBATdb (https://db.combat.ox.ac.uk). This enables exploration of multi-modal datasets arising from profiling of patients with different severities of illness admitted to hospital in the first phase of the pandemic in the UK prior to vaccination, compared with community cases, healthy controls, and patients with all-cause sepsis and influenza. These data include whole blood transcriptomics, plasma proteomics, epigenomics, single-cell multi-omics, immune repertoire sequencing, flow and mass cytometry, and cohort metadata. COMBATdb provides access to the processed data in a well-defined framework of samples, cell types and genes/proteins that allows exploration across the assayed modalities, with functionality including browse, search, download, calculation and visualisation via shiny apps. This advances the ability of users to leverage COMBAT datasets to understand the pathogenesis of COVID-19, and the nature of specific and shared features with other infectious diseases.

Sepsis is defined as a dysregulated host response to infection leading to organs failure. Among them, sepsis induces skeletal muscle (SM) alterations that contribute to acquired-weakness in critically ill patients. Proteomics and metabolomics could unravel biological mechanisms in sepsis-related organ dysfunction. Our objective was to characterize a distinctive signature of septic shock in human SM by using an integrative multi-omics approach. Muscle biopsies were obtained as part of a multicenter non-interventional prospective study. Study population included patients in septic shock (S group, with intra-abdominal source of sepsis) and two critically ill control populations: cardiogenic shock (C group) and brain dead (BD group). The proteins and metabolites were extracted and analyzed by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography-coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry, respectively. Fifty patients were included, 19 for the S group (53% male, 64 ± 17 years, SAPS II 45 ± 14), 12 for the C group (75% male, 63 ± 4 years, SAPS II 43 ± 15), 19 for the BD group (63% male, 58 ± 10 years, SAPS II 58 ± 9). Biopsies were performed in median 3 days [interquartile range 1-4]) after intensive care unit admission. Respectively 31 patients and 40 patients were included in the proteomics and metabolomics analyses of 2264 proteins and 259 annotated metabolites. Enrichment analysis revealed that mitochondrial pathways were significantly decreased in the S group at protein level: oxidative phosphorylation (adjusted p = 0.008); branched chained amino acids degradation (adjusted p = 0.005); citrate cycle (adjusted p = 0.005); ketone body metabolism (adjusted p = 0.003) or fatty acid degradation (adjusted p = 0.008). Metabolic reprogramming was also suggested (i) by the differential abundance of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors signaling pathway (adjusted p = 0.007), and (ii) by the accumulation of fatty acids like octanedioic acid dimethyl or hydroxydecanoic. Increased polyamines and depletion of mitochondrial thioredoxin or mitochondrial peroxiredoxin indicated a high level of oxidative stress in the S group. Coordinated alterations in the proteomic and metabolomic profiles reveal a septic shock signature in SM, highlighting a global impairment of mitochondria-related metabolic pathways, the depletion of antioxidant capacities, and a metabolic shift towards lipid accumulation.ClinicalTrial registration: NCT02789995. Date of first registration 03/06/2016.

Sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE) is an intricated complication of sepsis that brings abnormal emotional and memory dysfunction and increases patients' mortality. Patients' alterations and abnormal function seen in SAE occur in the hippocampus, the primary brain region responsible for memory and emotional control, but the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms remain unclear. In the current study, we employed an integrative analysis combining the RNA-seq-based transcriptomics and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based metabolomics to comprehensively obtain the enriched genes and metabolites and their core network pathways in the endotoxin (LPS)-injected SAE mice model. As a result, SAE mice exhibited behavioral changes, and their hippocampus showed upregulated inflammatory cytokines and morphological alterations. The omics analysis identified 81 differentially expressed metabolites (variable importance in projection [VIP] > 1 and p < 0.05) and 1747 differentially expressed genes (Foldchange >2 and p < 0.05) were detected in SAE-grouped hippocampus. Moreover, 31 compounds and 100 potential target genes were employed for the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Markup Language (KGML) network analysis to explore the core signaling pathways for the progression of SAE. The integrative pathway analysis showed that various dysregulated metabolism pathways, including lipids metabolism, amino acids, glucose and nucleotides, inflammation-related pathways, and deregulated synapses, were tightly associated with hippocampus dysfunction at early SAE. These findings provide a landscape for understanding the pathophysiological mechanisms of the hippocampus in the progression of SAE and pave the way to identify therapeutic targets in future studies.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a life-threatening condition characterized by hypoxemia and poor lung compliance, is associated with high mortality. ARDS induced by COVID-19 has similar clinical presentations and pathological manifestations as non-COVID-19 ARDS. However, COVID-19 ARDS is associated with a more protracted inflammatory respiratory failure compared to traditional ARDS. Therefore, a comprehensive molecular comparison of ARDS of different etiologies groups may pave the way for more specific clinical interventions.

In this study, we compared COVID-19 ARDS (n = 43) and bacterial sepsis-induced (non-COVID-19) ARDS (n = 24) using multi-omic plasma profiles covering 663 metabolites, 1,051 lipids, and 266 proteins. To address both between- and within- ARDS group variabilities we followed two approaches. First, we identified 706 molecules differently abundant between the two ARDS etiologies, revealing more than 40 biological processes differently regulated between the two groups. From these processes, we assembled a cascade of therapeutically relevant pathways downstream of sphingosine metabolism. The analysis suggests a possible overactivation of arginine metabolism involved in long-term sequelae of ARDS and highlights the potential of JAK inhibitors to improve outcomes in bacterial sepsis-induced ARDS. The second part of our study involved the comparison of the two ARDS groups with respect to clinical manifestations. Using a data-driven multi-omic network, we identified signatures of acute kidney injury (AKI) and thrombocytosis within each ARDS group. The AKI-associated network implicated mitochondrial dysregulation which might lead to post-ARDS renal-sequalae. The thrombocytosis-associated network hinted at a synergy between prothrombotic processes, namely IL-17, MAPK, TNF signaling pathways, and cell adhesion molecules. Thus, we speculate that combination therapy targeting two or more of these processes may ameliorate thrombocytosis-mediated hypercoagulation.

We present a first comprehensive molecular characterization of differences between two ARDS etiologies-COVID-19 and bacterial sepsis. Further investigation into the identified pathways will lead to a better understanding of the pathophysiological processes, potentially enabling novel therapeutic interventions.

Intra-abdominal infection is a common cause of sepsis, and intra-abdominal sepsis leads to ∼156 000 U.S. deaths annually. African American/Black adults have higher incidence and mortality rates from sepsis compared to Non-Hispanic White adults. A limited number of studies have traced survival outcomes to molecular changes; however, these studies primarily only included Non-Hispanic White adults. Our goal is to better understand molecular changes that may contribute to differences in sepsis survival in African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White adults with primary intra-abdominal infection. We employed discovery-based plasma proteomics of patient samples from the Protocolized Care for Early Septic Shock (ProCESS) cohort (N = 107). We identified 49 proteins involved in the acute phase response and complement system whose expression levels are associated with both survival outcome and racial background. Additionally, 82 proteins differentially-expressed in survivors were specific to African American/Black or Non-Hispanic White patients, suggesting molecular-level heterogeneity in sepsis patients in key inflammatory pathways. A smaller, robust set of 19 proteins were in common in African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White survivors and may represent potential universal molecular changes in sepsis. Overall, this study identifies molecular factors that may contribute to differences in survival outcomes in African American/Black patients that are not fully explained by socioeconomic or other non-biological factors.

Seasonal influenza virus infection causes a range of disease severity, including lower respiratory tract infection with respiratory failure. We evaluated the association of common variants in interferon (IFN) regulatory genes with susceptibility to critical influenza infection in children.

We performed targeted sequencing of 69 influenza-associated candidate genes in 348 children from 24 US centers admitted to the intensive care unit with influenza infection and lacking risk factors for severe influenza infection (PICFlu cohort, 59.4% male). As controls, whole genome sequencing from 675 children with asthma (CAMP cohort, 62.5% male) was compared. We assessed functional relevance using PICFlu whole blood gene expression levels for the gene and calculated IFN gene signature score.

Common variants in DDX58, encoding the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) receptor, demonstrated association above or around the Bonferroni-corrected threshold (synonymous variant rs3205166; intronic variant rs4487862). The intronic single-nucleotide polymorphism rs4487862 minor allele was associated with decreased DDX58 expression and IFN signature (P < .05 and P = .0009, respectively) which provided evidence supporting the genetic variants' impact on RIG-I and IFN immunity.

We provide evidence associating common gene variants in DDX58 with susceptibility to severe influenza infection in children. RIG-I may be essential for preventing life-threatening influenza-associated disease.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a life-threatening condition during critical illness, is a common complication of COVID-19. It can originate from various disease etiologies, including severe infections, major injury, or inhalation of irritants. ARDS poses substantial clinical challenges due to a lack of etiology-specific therapies, multisystem involvement, and heterogeneous, poor patient outcomes. A molecular comparison of ARDS groups holds the potential to reveal common and distinct mechanisms underlying ARDS pathogenesis. In this study, we performed a comparative analysis of urine-based metabolomics and proteomics profiles from COVID-19 ARDS patients (n = 42) and bacterial sepsis-induced ARDS patients (n = 17). The comparison of these ARDS etiologies identified 150 metabolites and 70 proteins that were differentially abundant between the two groups. Based on these findings, we interrogated the interplay of cell adhesion/extracellular matrix molecules, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ARDS pathogenesis through a multi-omic network approach. Moreover, we identified a proteomic signature associated with mortality in COVID-19 ARDS patients, which contained several proteins that had previously been implicated in clinical manifestations frequently linked with ARDS pathogenesis. In summary, our results provide evidence for significant molecular differences in ARDS patients from different etiologies and a potential synergy of extracellular matrix molecules, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ARDS pathogenesis. The proteomic mortality signature should be further investigated in future studies to develop prediction models for COVID-19 patient outcomes.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a life-threatening condition characterized by hypoxemia and poor lung compliance, is associated with high mortality. ARDS induced by COVID-19 has similar clinical presentations and pathological manifestations as non-COVID-19 ARDS. However, COVID-19 ARDS is associated with a more protracted inflammatory respiratory failure compared to traditional ARDS. Therefore, a comprehensive molecular comparison of ARDS of different etiologies groups may pave the way for more specific clinical interventions.

In this study, we compared COVID-19 ARDS (n=43) and bacterial sepsis-induced (non-COVID-19) ARDS (n=24) using multi-omic plasma profiles covering 663 metabolites, 1,051 lipids, and 266 proteins. To address both between- and within-ARDS group variabilities we followed two approaches. First, we identified 706 molecules differently abundant between the two ARDS etiologies, revealing more than 40 biological processes differently regulated between the two groups. From these processes, we assembled a cascade of therapeutically relevant pathways downstream of sphingosine metabolism. The analysis suggests a possible overactivation of arginine metabolism involved in long-term sequelae of ARDS and highlights the potential of JAK inhibitors to improve outcomes in bacterial sepsis-induced ARDS. The second part of our study involved the comparison of the two ARDS groups with respect to clinical manifestations. Using a data-driven multi-omic network, we identified signatures of acute kidney injury (AKI) and thrombocytosis within each ARDS group. The AKI-associated network implicated mitochondrial dysregulation which might lead to post-ARDS renal-sequalae. The thrombocytosis-associated network hinted at a synergy between prothrombotic processes, namely IL-17, MAPK, TNF signaling pathways, and cell adhesion molecules. Thus, we speculate that combination therapy targeting two or more of these processes may ameliorate thrombocytosis-mediated hypercoagulation.

We present a first comprehensive molecular characterization of differences between two ARDS etiologies - COVID-19 and bacterial sepsis. Further investigation into the identified pathways will lead to a better understanding of the pathophysiological processes, potentially enabling novel therapeutic interventions.

Severe infections are a common cause of ICU admission, with a high morbidity and mortality. Omics, namely proteomics and metabolomics, aim to identify, characterize, and quantify biological molecules to achieve a systems-level understanding of disease. The aim of this review is to provide a clear overview of the current evidence of the role of proteomics and metabolomics in severe infections.

Proteomics and metabolomics are technologies that are being used to explore new markers of diagnosis and prognosis, clarify mechanisms of disease, and consequently discover potential targets of therapy and finally of a better disease phenotyping. These technologies are starting to be used but not yet in clinical use.

Our traditional way of approaching the disease as sepsis is believing that a process can be broken into its parts and that the whole can be explained by the sum of each part. This approach is highly reductionist and does not take the system complexity nor the nonlinear dynamics of the processes. Proteomics and metabolomics allow the analysis of several proteins and metabolites simultaneously, thereby generating diagnostic and prognostic signatures. An exciting future prospect for proteomics and metabolomics is their employment towards precision medicine.

Liver failure is a life-threatening complication of infections restricting the host's response to infection. The pivotal role of the liver in metabolic, synthetic, and immunological pathways enforces limits the host's ability to control the immune response appropriately, making it vulnerable to ineffective pathogen resistance and tissue damage. Deregulated networks of liver diseases are gradually uncovered by high-throughput, single-cell resolved OMICS technologies visualizing an astonishing diversity of cell types and regulatory interaction driving tolerogenic signaling in health and inflammation in disease. Therefore, this review elucidates the effects of the dysregulated host response on the liver, consequences for the immune response, and possible avenues for personalized therapeutics.

BK polyomavirus-associated nephropathy (BKPyVAN) carries a risk of irreversible allograft injury. While detection of BK viremia and biopsy assessment are the current diagnostic gold standard, the diagnostic value of biomarkers reflecting tissue injury (donor-derived cell-free DNA [dd-cfDNA]) or immune activation (C-X-C motif chemokine ligand [CXCL]9 and CXCL10) remains poorly defined.

For this retrospective study, 19 cases of BKPyVAN were selected from the Vienna transplant cohort (biopsies performed between 2012 and 2019). Eight patients with T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR), 17 with antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR) and 10 patients without polyomavirus nephropathy or rejection served as controls. Fractions of dd-cfDNA were quantified using next-generation sequencing and CXCL9 and CXCL10 were detected using multiplex immunoassays.

BKPyVAN was associated with a slight increase in dd-cfDNA (median; interquartile range: .38% [.27%-1.2%] vs. .21% [.12%-.34%] in non-rejecting control patients; p = .005). Levels were far lower than in ABMR (1.2% [.82%-2.5%]; p = .004]), but not different from TCMR (.54% [.26%-3.56%]; p = .52). Within the BKPyVAN cohort, we found no relationship between dd-cfDNA levels and the extent of tubulo-interstitial infiltrates, BKPyVAN class and BK viremia/viruria, respectively. In some contrast to dd-cfDNA, concentrations of urinary CXCL9 and CXCL10 exceeded those detected in ABMR, but similar increases were also found in TCMR.

BKPyVAN can induce moderate increases in dd-cfDNA and concomitant high urinary excretion of chemokines, but this pattern may be indistinguishable from that of TCMR. Our results argue against a significant value of these biomarkers to reliably distinguish BKPyVAN from rejection.

The endothelium has multiple functions, ranging from maintaining vascular homeostasis and providing nutrition and oxygen to tissues to evocating inflammation under adverse conditions and determining endothelial barrier disruption, resulting in dysfunction. Endothelial dysfunction represents a common condition associated with the pathogenesis of all diseases of the cardiovascular system, as well as of diseases of all of the other systems of the human body, including sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and COVID-19 respiratory distress. Such evidence is leading to the identification of potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for preserving, reverting, or restoring endothelium integrity and functionality by promptly treating its dysfunction. Here, some strategies for achieving these goals are explored, despite the diverse challenges that exist, necessitating significant bench work associated with an increased number of clinical studies.

Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury (SA-AKI) is a common complication in critically ill patients with high morbidity and mortality. SA-AKI varies considerably in disease presentation, progression, and response to treatment, highlighting the heterogeneity of the underlying biological mechanisms. In this review, we briefly describe the pathophysiology of SA-AKI, biomarkers, reference databases, and available omics techniques. Advances in omics technology allow for comprehensive analysis of SA-AKI, and the integration of multiple omics provides an opportunity to understand the information flow behind the disease. These approaches will drive a shift in current paradigms for the prevention, diagnosis, and staging and provide the renal community with significant advances in precision medicine in SA-AKI analysis.

Many primary-tumor subregions exhibit low levels of molecular oxygen and restricted access to nutrients due to poor vascularization in the tissue, phenomenon known as hypoxia. Hypoxic tumors are able to regulate the expression of certain genes and signaling molecules in the microenvironment that shift it towards a more aggressive phenotype. The transcriptional landscape of the tumor favors malignant transformation of neighboring cells and their migration to distant sites. Herein, we focused on identifying key proteins that participate in the signaling crossroads between hypoxic environment and metastasis progression that remain poorly defined. To shed light on these mechanisms, we performed an integrated multi-omics analysis encompassing genomic/transcriptomic alterations of hypoxia-related genes and Buffa hypoxia scores across 17 pancarcinomas taken from the PanCancer Atlas project from The Cancer Genome Atlas consortium, protein-protein interactome network, shortest paths from hypoxia-related proteins to metastatic and angiogenic phenotypes, and drugs involved in current clinical trials to treat the metastatic disease. As results, we identified 30 hypoxia-related proteins highly involved in metastasis and angiogenesis. This set of proteins, validated with the MSK-MET Project, could represent key targets for developing therapies. The upregulation of mRNA was the most prevalent alteration in all cancer types. The highest frequencies of genomic/transcriptomic alterations and hypoxia score belonged to tumor stage 4 and positive metastatic status in all pancarcinomas. The most significantly associated signaling pathways were HIF-1, PI3K-Akt, thyroid hormone, ErbB, FoxO, mTOR, insulin, MAPK, Ras, AMPK, and VEGF. The interactome network revealed high-confidence interactions among hypoxic and metastatic proteins. The analysis of shortest paths revealed several ways to spread metastasis and angiogenesis from hypoxic proteins. Lastly, we identified 23 drugs enrolled in clinical trials focused on metastatic disease treatment. Six of them were involved in advanced-stage clinical trials: aflibercept, bevacizumab, cetuximab, erlotinib, ipatasertib, and panitumumab.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a life-threatening lung injury characterized by an acute inflammatory response in the lung parenchyma. Hence, it is considered as the most appropriate clinical syndrome to study pathogenic mechanisms of lung inflammation. ARDS is associated with increased morbidity and mortality in the intensive care unit (ICU), while no effective pharmacological treatment exists. It is very important therefore to fully characterize the underlying pathobiology and the related mechanisms, in order to develop novel therapeutic approaches. In vivo and in vitro models are important pre-clinical tools in biological and medical research in the mechanistic and pathological understanding of the majority of diseases. In this review, we will present data from selected experimental models of lung injury/acute lung inflammation, which have been based on clinical disorders that can lead to the development of ARDS and related inflammatory lung processes in humans, including ventilation-induced lung injury (VILI), sepsis, ischemia/reperfusion, smoke, acid aspiration, radiation, transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI), influenza, Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae and coronaviruses infection. Data from the corresponding clinical conditions will also be presented. The mechanisms related to lung inflammation that will be covered are oxidative stress, neutrophil extracellular traps, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, surfactant, and water and ion channels. Finally, we will present a brief overview of emerging techniques in the field of omics research that have been applied to ARDS research, encompassing genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, which may recognize factors to help stratify ICU patients at risk, predict their prognosis, and possibly, serve as more specific therapeutic targets.

Elucidating cellular metabolism led to many breakthroughs in biotechnology, synthetic biology, and health sciences. To date, deriving metabolic fluxes by 13C tracer experiments is the most prominent approach for studying metabolic fluxes quantitatively, often with high accuracy and precision. However, the technique has a high demand for experimental resources. Alternatively, flux balance analysis (FBA) has been employed to estimate metabolic fluxes without labeling experiments. It is less informative but can benefit from the low costs and low experimental efforts and gain flux estimates in experimentally difficult conditions. Methods to integrate relevant experimental data have been emerged to improve FBA flux estimations. Data from transcription profiling is often selected since it is easy to generate at the genome scale, typically embedded by a discretization of differential and non-differential expressed genes coding for the respective enzymes.

We established the novel method Linear Programming based Gene Expression Model (LPM-GEM). LPM-GEM linearly embeds gene expression into FBA constraints. We implemented three strategies to reduce thermodynamically infeasible loops, which is a necessary prerequisite for such an omics-based model building. As a case study, we built a model of B. subtilis grown in eight different carbon sources. We obtained good flux predictions based on the respective transcription profiles when validating with 13C tracer based metabolic flux data of the same conditions. We could well predict the specific carbon sources. When testing the model on another, unseen dataset that was not used during training, good prediction performance was also observed. Furthermore, LPM-GEM outperformed a well-established model building methods.

Employing LPM-GEM integrates gene expression data efficiently. The method supports gene expression-based FBA models and can be applied as an alternative to estimate metabolic fluxes when tracer experiments are inappropriate.

Infections are common and need minimal treatment; however, occasionally, due to inappropriate immune response, they can develop into a life-threatening condition known as sepsis. Sepsis is a global concern with high morbidity and mortality. There has been little advancement in the treatment of sepsis, outside of antibiotics and supportive measures. Some of the difficulty in identifying novel therapies is the heterogeneity of the condition. Metabolic phenotyping has great potential for gaining understanding of this heterogeneity and how the metabolic fingerprints of patients with sepsis differ based on survival, organ dysfunction, disease severity, type of infection, treatment or causative organism. Moreover, metabolomics offers potential for patient stratification as metabolic profiles obtained from analytical platforms can reflect human individuality and phenotypic variation. This article reviews the most relevant metabolomic studies in sepsis and aims to provide an overview of the metabolic derangements in sepsis and how metabolic phenotyping has been used to identify sub-groups of patients with this condition. Finally, we consider the new avenues that metabolomics could open, exploring novel phenotypes and untangling the heterogeneity of sepsis, by looking at advances made in the field with other -omics technologies.

Emerging evidence shows that modulation of the microbiome can suppress intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH)-induced intestinal barrier damage through the regulation of amino acid (AA) biosynthesis. Here, we investigated the protective effects of orally gavaged Lactobacillus acidophilus L-92 (L92) and a mixture of AA in rats with induced IAH. The results showed that both L92 and AA pretreatments effectively mitigated IAH-induced intestinal damage. Interestingly, L92 but not AA prevented metagenomic changes induced by IAH. Bacteroides fragilis, Bacteroides eggerthii, Bacteroides ovatus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella, and extensively altered functional pathways were associated with L92-mediated host protection. Metabolomic profiling revealed that tryptophan metabolism was involved in both L92- and AA-mediated gut protection. The tryptophan metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) is a sensitive biomarker for IAH in rats and patients with either gut-derived sepsis (n = 41) or all-source sepsis (n = 293). In conclusion, we show that microbiome and metabolic modulations can effectively prevent IAH-induced intestinal damage and that 5-HIAA is a potential metabolic marker for IAH and sepsis. IMPORTANCE Gut protection through modulation of the microbiome for critically ill patients has been gaining much attention recently. Intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) is a prevailing clinical feature of acute gastrointestinal injuries in critically ill patients, characterized by nonspecific intestinal barrier damage. Prolonged IAH can induce or aggravate the development of sepsis and multiorgan dysfunctions. Therefore, the prevention of IAH-induced damage in rats through microbiome and metabolic interventions by commercially available L92 and AA treatments and the identification of 5-HIAA as an important marker for IAH/sepsis have important clinical implications for the treatment and early diagnosis of critically ill patients.

Sepsis is defined as a dysregulated host-response to infection, across all ages and pathogens. What defines a dysregulated state remains intensively researched but incompletely understood. Here, we dissect the meaning of this definition and its importance for the diagnosis and management of sepsis. We deliberate on pathophysiological features and dogmas that range from cytokine storms and immune paralysis to dormancy and altered homeostasis setpoints. Mathematical reasoning, used to test for plausibility, reveals three interlinked cardinal rules governing host-response trajectories in sepsis. Rule one highlights that the amplitude of the immune response while important is not sufficient and is strictly dependent on rule two, specifying bioenergetic capacity and are together dynamically driven by rule three, delineating stability and alterations in setpoints. We consider these rules and associated pathophysiological parameters for guiding data-science and artificial intelligence mining of multi-omics and big-data for improving the precision of diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to sepsis. FUNDING: PG funded by the European Regional Development Fund and Welsh Government (Ser Cymru programme - Project Sepsis).

During sepsis, defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction due to dysregulated host response to infection, systemic inflammation activates endothelial cells and initiates a multifaceted cascade of pro-inflammatory signaling events, resulting in increased permeability and excessive recruitment of leukocytes. Vascular endothelial cells share many common properties but have organ-specific phenotypes with unique structure and function. Thus, therapies directed against endothelial cell phenotypes are needed to address organ-specific endothelial cell dysfunction. Omics allow for the study of expressed genes, proteins and/or metabolites in biological systems and provide insight on temporal and spatial evolution of signals during normal and diseased conditions. Proteomics quantifies protein expression, identifies protein-protein interactions and can reveal mechanistic changes in endothelial cells that would not be possible to study via reductionist methods alone. In this review, we provide an overview of how sepsis pathophysiology impacts omics with a focus on proteomic analysis of mouse endothelial cells during sepsis/inflammation and its relationship with the more clinically relevant omics of human endothelial cells. We discuss how omics has been used to define septic endotype signatures in different populations with a focus on proteomic analysis in organ-specific microvascular endothelial cells during sepsis or septic-like inflammation. We believe that studies defining septic endotypes based on proteomic expression in endothelial cell phenotypes are urgently needed to complement omic profiling of whole blood and better define sepsis subphenotypes. Lastly, we provide a discussion of how in silico modeling can be used to leverage the large volume of omics data to map response pathways in sepsis.

Current biomarkers for the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis llave limited accuracy. The development of precision medicine based on omic's technologies offer an opportunity to improve the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis.

To evalúate the sensitivity and specificity of tests based on omic technologies (metabolomics, proteomics and genomics) for the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis.

A systematic review was carried out in electronic databases. Observational studies and clinical trials evaluating tests based on omic technologies in neonates compared to culture for the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis were included. For the meta-analysis, a random effects model and an evaluation of heterogeneity were proposed through a subgroup analysis by omic test, gestational age and time of establishment of sepsis.

Differential expression of the genome, proteome and metabolome is observed between neonates with and without sepsis, identifying different biomarkers. The meta-analysis showed a pooled summary measure for sensitivity of0.88 (95% CI 0.72, 0.96), specificity of0.76 (95% CI 0.62, 0.85).

Omics-based tests have a high sensitivity, with the best performing ones being those based on genomics / transcriptomics. The studies have high heterogeneity.

Nonhuman primates (NHP) are particularly important for modeling infections with viruses that do not naturally replicate in rodent cells. Zika virus (ZIKV) has been responsible for sporadic epidemics, but in 2015 a disseminated outbreak of ZIKV resulted in the World Health Organization declaring it a global health emergency. Since the advent of this last epidemic, several NHP species, including the baboon, have been utilized for modeling and understanding the complications of ZIKV infection in humans; several health issues related to the outcome of infection have not been resolved yet and require further investigation. This study was designed to validate, in baboons, the molecular signatures that have previously been identified in ZIKV-infected humans and macaque models. We performed a comprehensive molecular analysis of baboons during acute ZIKV infection, including flow cytometry, cytokine, immunological, and transcriptomic analyses. We show here that, similar to most human cases, ZIKV infection of male baboons tends to be subclinical, but is associated with a rapid and transient antiviral interferon-based response signature that induces a detectable humoral and cell-mediated immune response. This immunity against the virus protects animals from challenge with a divergent ZIKV strain, as evidenced by undetectable viremia but clear anamnestic responses. These results provide additional support for the use of baboons as an alternative animal model to macaques and validate omic techniques that could help identify the molecular basis of complications associated with ZIKV infections in humans.

High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) have multiple endothelioprotective properties. During SARS-CoV-2 infection, HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) concentration is markedly reduced, and studies have described severe impairment of the functionality of HDL particles. Here, we report a multi-omic investigation of the first administration of recombinant HDL (rHDL) particles in a severe COVID-19 patient in an intensive care unit. Plasma ApoA1 increased and HDL-C decreased after each recombinant HDL injection, suggesting that these particles were functional in terms of reverse cholesterol transport. The proportion of large HDL particles also increased after injection of recombinant HDL. Shotgun proteomics performed on HDLs isolated by ultracentrifugation indicated that ApoA1 was more abundant after injections whereas most of the pro-inflammatory proteins identified were less abundant. Assessment of Serum amyloid A-1, inflammatory markers, and cytokines showed a significant decrease for most of them during recombinant HDL infusion. Our results suggest that recombinant HDL infusion is feasible and a potential therapeutic strategy to be explored in COVID-19 patients.

Natural immunity to malaria develops over time with repeated malaria episodes, but protection against severe malaria and immune regulation limiting immunopathology, called tolerance, develops more rapidly. Here, we comprehensively profile the blood immune system in patients, with or without prior malaria exposure, over 1 year after acute symptomatic Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Using a data-driven analysis approach to describe the immune landscape over time, we show that a dampened inflammatory response is associated with reduced γδ T cell expansion, early expansion of CD16+ monocytes, and parasite-specific antibodies of IgG1 and IgG3 isotypes. This also coincided with reduced parasitemia and duration of hospitalization. Our data indicate that antibody-mediated phagocytosis during the blood stage infection leads to lower parasitemia and less inflammatory response with reduced γδ T cell expansion. This enhanced control and reduced inflammation points to a potential mechanism on how tolerance is established following repeated malaria exposure.

Sepsis is a heterogeneous disease with variable clinical course and several clinical phenotypes. As it is associated with an increased risk of death, patients with this condition are candidates for receipt of a very well-structured and protocolized treatment. All patients should receive the fundamental pillars of sepsis management, which are infection control, initial resuscitation, and multiorgan support. However, specific subgroups of patients may benefit from a personalized approach with interventions targeted towards specific pathophysiological mechanisms. Herein, we will review the framework for identifying subpopulations of patients with sepsis, septic shock, and multiorgan dysfunction who may benefit from specific therapies. Some of these approaches are still in the early stages of research, while others are already in routine use in clinical practice, but together will help in the effective generation and safe implementation of precision medicine in sepsis.

The potential role of the gut microbiome as a predictor of immune-mediated HIV-1 control in the absence of antiretroviral therapy (ART) is still unknown. In the BCN02 clinical trial, which combined the MVA.HIVconsv immunogen with the latency-reversing agent romidepsin in early-ART treated HIV-1 infected individuals, 23% (3/13) of participants showed sustained low-levels of plasma viremia during 32 weeks of a monitored ART pause (MAP). Here, we present a multi-omics analysis to identify compositional and functional gut microbiome patterns associated with HIV-1 control in the BCN02 trial.

Viremic controllers during the MAP (controllers) exhibited higher Bacteroidales/Clostridiales ratio and lower microbial gene richness before vaccination and throughout the study intervention when compared to non-controllers. Longitudinal assessment indicated that the gut microbiome of controllers was enriched in pro-inflammatory bacteria and depleted in butyrate-producing bacteria and methanogenic archaea. Functional profiling also showed that metabolic pathways related to fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis were significantly increased in controllers. Fecal metaproteome analyses confirmed that baseline functional differences were mainly driven by Clostridiales. Participants with high baseline Bacteroidales/Clostridiales ratio had increased pre-existing immune activation-related transcripts. The Bacteroidales/Clostridiales ratio as well as host immune-activation signatures inversely correlated with HIV-1 reservoir size.

The present proof-of-concept study suggests the Bacteroidales/Clostridiales ratio as a novel gut microbiome signature associated with HIV-1 reservoir size and immune-mediated viral control after ART interruption. Video abstract.

Treatment of severe COVID-19 is currently limited by clinical heterogeneity and incomplete description of specific immune biomarkers. We present here a comprehensive multi-omic blood atlas for patients with varying COVID-19 severity in an integrated comparison with influenza and sepsis patients versus healthy volunteers. We identify immune signatures and correlates of host response. Hallmarks of disease severity involved cells, their inflammatory mediators and networks, including progenitor cells and specific myeloid and lymphocyte subsets, features of the immune repertoire, acute phase response, metabolism, and coagulation. Persisting immune activation involving AP-1/p38MAPK was a specific feature of COVID-19. The plasma proteome enabled sub-phenotyping into patient clusters, predictive of severity and outcome. Systems-based integrative analyses including tensor and matrix decomposition of all modalities revealed feature groupings linked with severity and specificity compared to influenza and sepsis. Our approach and blood atlas will support future drug development, clinical trial design, and personalized medicine approaches for COVID-19.

Sepsis is a clinical syndrome with high mortality and morbidity rates. In sepsis, the abrupt release of cytokines by the innate immune system may cause multiorgan failure, leading to septic shock and associated complications. In the presence of a number of systemic disorders, such as sepsis, infections, diabetes, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), cardiorenal syndrome (CRS) type 5 is defined by concomitant cardiac and renal dysfunctions Thus, our study suggests that certain mRNAs and unexplored pathways may pave a way to unravel critical therapeutic targets in three debilitating and interrelated illnesses, namely, sepsis, SLE, and CRS. Sepsis, SLE, and CRS are closely interrelated complex diseases likely sharing an overlapping pathogenesis caused by erroneous gene network activities. We sought to identify the shared gene networks and the key genes for sepsis, SLE, and CRS by completing an integrative analysis. Initially, 868 DEGs were identified in 16 GSE datasets. Based on degree centrality, 27 hub genes were revealed. The gProfiler webtool was used to perform functional annotations and enriched molecular pathway analyses. Finally, core hub genes (EGR1, MMP9, and CD44) were validated using RT-PCR analysis. Our comprehensive multiplex network approach to hub gene discovery is effective, as evidenced by the findings. This work provides a novel research path for a new research direction in multi-omics biological data analysis.

What is the topic of this review? The importance of the early life gut microbiome, with a focus on preterm infants and microbially related diseases. Current techniques to study the preterm gut microbiome are appraised, and the potential of recent methodological advancements is discussed. What advances does it highlight? Recent findings in the field achieved by the application of advanced technologies, the applicability of intestinally derived organoid models to study host-microbiome interactions in the preterm gut, and recent developments in enhancing the physiological relevance of such models. Preterm intestinally derived organoids may provide novel insights into the mechanisms underlying preterm disease, as well as diagnosis and treatment opportunities. These models have huge translational potential, offering a step towards precision medicine.

Accumulating evidence affirms the importance of the gut microbiome in both health and disease. In early life, there exists a critical period in which the composition of gut microbes is particularly malleable and subject to a wide range of influencing factors. Disturbances to microbial communities during this time may be beneficial or detrimental to short and long-term health outcomes. For infants born prematurely, naïve immune systems, immature gastrointestinal tracts and additional clinical needs put this population at high risk of abnormal microbial colonisation, resulting in increased susceptibility to diseases including necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) and late-onset sepsis (LOS). Traditional cell culture methods, gnotobiotic animals, molecular sequencing techniques (16S rRNA gene sequencing and metagenomics) and advanced 'omics' technologies (transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics) have been fundamental in exploring the associations between diet, gut microbes, microbial functions and disease. Despite significant investment and ongoing research efforts, prevention and treatment strategies in NEC and LOS remain limited. Recent endeavours have focused on searching for new, more physiologically relevant models to simulate the preterm intestine. Preterm intestinally derived organoids represent a promising in vitro approach in the study of host-microbiome interactions in the preterm infant gut, offering new and exciting possibilities in this field.

Sepsis and septic shock remain leading causes of morbidity and mortality for patients in the intensive care unit. During the early phase, immune cells produce various cytokines leading to prompt activation of the immune system. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) respond to different signals producing inflammatory factors and executing their antimicrobial mechanisms, resulting in the engulfment and elimination of invading pathogens. However, excessive activation caused by various inflammatory signals produced during sepsis progression can lead to the alteration of PMN signaling and subsequent defects in their functionality. Here, we analyzed samples from 34 patients in septic shock, focusing on PMNs gene expression and proteome changes associated with septic shock. We revealed that, compared to those patients who survived longer than five days, PMNs from patients who had fulminant sepsis were characterized by a dysfunctional hyper-activation, show altered metabolism, and recent exit from the cell cycle and signs of cellular lifespan. We believe that this multi-omics approach, although limited, pinpoints the alterations in PMNs' functionality, which may be rescued by targeted treatments.

Neonates and children in low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs) contribute to the highest number of sepsis-associated deaths globally. Interventions to prevent sepsis mortality are hampered by a lack of comprehensive epidemiological data and pathophysiological understanding of biological pathways. In this review, we discuss the challenges faced by LMICs in diagnosing sepsis in these age groups. We highlight a role for multi-omics and health care data to improve diagnostic accuracy of clinical algorithms, arguing that health-care systems urgently need precision medicine to avoid the pitfalls of missed diagnoses, misdiagnoses, and overdiagnoses, and associated antimicrobial resistance. We discuss ethical, regulatory, and systemic barriers related to the collection and use of big data in LMICs. Technologies such as cloud computing, artificial intelligence, and medical tricorders might help, but they require collaboration with local communities. Co-partnering (joint equal development of technology between producer and end-users) could facilitate integration of these technologies as part of future care-delivery systems, offering a chance to transform the global management and prevention of sepsis for neonates and children.

Cytokine storm is a phenomenon characterized by strong elevated circulating cytokines that most often occur after an overreactive immune system is activated by an acute systemic infection. A variety of cells participate in cytokine storm induction and progression, with profiles of cytokines released during cytokine storm varying from disease to disease. This review focuses on pathophysiological mechanisms underlying cytokine storm induction and progression induced by pathogenic invasive infectious diseases. Strategies for targeted treatment of various types of infection-induced cytokine storms are described from both host and pathogen perspectives. In summary, current studies indicate that cytokine storm-targeted therapies can effectively alleviate tissue damage while promoting the clearance of invading pathogens. Based on this premise, "multi-omics" immune system profiling should facilitate the development of more effective therapeutic strategies to alleviate cytokine storms caused by various diseases.

Background: Sepsis and septic shock are still associated with a high mortality rate. The early-stage prediction of septic shock outcomes would be helpful to clinicians for designing their treatment protocol. In addition, it would aid clinicians in patient management by understanding gender disparity in terms of clinical outcomes of septic shock by identifying whether there are sex-based differences in sepsis-associated mortality. Objective: This study aimed to test the hypothesis that gender-based metabolic heterogeneity is associated with sepsis survival and identify the biomarkers of mortality for septic shock in an Indian cohort. Method: The study was performed in an Indian population cohort diagnosed with sepsis/septic shock within 24 hours of admission. The study group was 50 patients admitted to intensive care, comprising 23 females and 27 males. Univariate and multivariate analysis were performed to identify the biomarkers for septic shock mortality and the gender-specific metabolic fingerprint in septic shock-associated mortality. Results: The energy-related metabolites, ketone bodies, choline, and NAG were found to be primarily responsible for differentiating survivors and non-survivors. The gender-based mortality stratification identified a female-specific association of the anti-inflammatory response, innate immune response, and β oxidation, and a male-specific association of the pro-inflammatory response to septic shock. Conclusion: The identified mortality biomarkers may help clinicians estimate the severity of a case, as well as predict the outcome and treatment efficacy. The study underlines that gender is one of the most significant biological factors influencing septic shock metabolomic profiles. This understanding can be utilized to identify novel gender-specific biomarkers and innovative targets relevant for gender medicine.

Sepsis remains a significant cause of neonatal mortality and morbidity, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Neonatal sepsis presents with nonspecific signs and symptoms that necessitate tests to confirm the diagnosis. Early and accurate diagnosis of infection will improve clinical outcomes and decrease the overuse of antibiotics. Current diagnostic methods rely on conventional culture methods, which is time-consuming, and may delay critical therapeutic decisions. Nonculture-based techniques including molecular methods and mass spectrometry may overcome some of the limitations seen with culture-based techniques. Biomarkers including hematological indices, cell adhesion molecules, interleukins, and acute-phase reactants have been used for the diagnosis of neonatal sepsis. In this review, we examine past and current microbiological techniques, hematological indices, and inflammatory biomarkers that may aid sepsis diagnosis. The search for an ideal biomarker that has adequate diagnostic accuracy early in sepsis is still ongoing. We discuss promising strategies for the future that are being developed and tested that may help us diagnose sepsis early and improve clinical outcomes. IMPACT: Reviews the clinical relevance of currently available diagnostic tests for sepsis. Summarizes the diagnostic accuracy of novel biomarkers for neonatal sepsis. Outlines future strategies including the use of omics technology, personalized medicine, and point of care tests.

Microvascular endothelial cells in the kidney have been a neglected cell type in sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (sepsis-AKI) research; yet, they offer tremendous potential as pharmacological targets. As endothelial cells in distinct cortical microvascular segments are highly heterogeneous, this Review focuses on endothelial cells in their anatomical niche. In animal models of sepsis-AKI, reduced glomerular blood flow has been attributed to inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase activation in arterioles and glomeruli, whereas decreased cortex peritubular capillary perfusion is associated with epithelial redox stress. Elevated systemic levels of vascular endothelial growth factor, reduced levels of circulating sphingosine 1-phosphate and loss of components of the glycocalyx from glomerular endothelial cells lead to increased microvascular permeability. Although coagulation disbalance occurs in all microvascular segments, the molecules involved differ between segments. Induction of the expression of adhesion molecules and leukocyte recruitment also occurs in a heterogeneous manner. Evidence of similar endothelial cell responses has been found in kidney and blood samples from patients with sepsis. Comprehensive studies are needed to investigate the relationships between segment-specific changes in the microvasculature and kidney function loss in sepsis-AKI. The application of omics technologies to kidney tissues from animals and patients will be key in identifying these relationships and in developing novel therapeutics for sepsis.

Currently, there is no therapy targeting septic cardiomyopathy (SC), a key contributor to organ dysfunction in sepsis. In this study, we used a machine learning (ML) pipeline to explore transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic data from patients with septic shock, and prospectively collected measurements of high-sensitive cardiac troponin and echocardiography. The purposes of the study were to suggest an exploratory methodology to identify and characterise the multiOMICs profile of (i) myocardial injury in patients with septic shock, and of (ii) cardiac dysfunction in patients with myocardial injury. The study included 27 adult patients admitted for septic shock. Peripheral blood samples for OMICS analysis and measurements of high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (hscTnT) were collected at two time points during the ICU stay. A ML-based study was designed and implemented to untangle the relations among the OMICS domains and the aforesaid biomarkers. The resulting ML pipeline consisted of two main experimental phases: recursive feature selection (FS) assessing the stability of biomarkers, and classification to characterise the multiOMICS profile of the target biomarkers. The application of a ML pipeline to circulate OMICS data in patients with septic shock has the potential to predict the risk of myocardial injury and the risk of cardiac dysfunction.

Sepsis is a global health emergency, which is caused by various sources of infection that lead to changes in gene expression, protein-coding, and metabolism. Advancements in "omics" technologies have provided valuable tools to unravel the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. In this study, we performed shotgun mass spectrometry in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from septic patients (N=24) and healthy controls (N=9) and combined these results with two public microarray leukocytes datasets. Through combination of transcriptome and proteome profiling, we identified 170 co-differentially expressed genes/proteins. Among these, 122 genes/proteins displayed the same expression trend. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed pathways related to lymphocyte functions with decreased status, and defense processes that were predicted to be strongly increased. Protein-protein interaction network analyses revealed two densely connected regions, which mainly included down-regulated genes/proteins that were related to the transcription of RNA, translation of proteins, and mitochondrial translation. Additionally, we identified one module comprising of up-regulated genes/proteins, which were mainly related to low-density neutrophils (LDNs). LDNs were reported in sepsis and in COVID-19. Changes in gene expression level were validated using quantitative real-time PCR in PBMCs from patients with sepsis. To further support that the source of the upregulated module of genes/proteins found in our results were derived from LDNs, we identified an increase of this population by flow cytometry in PBMC samples obtained from the same cohort of septic patients included in the proteomic analysis. This study provides new insights into a reprioritization of biological functions in response to sepsis that involved a transcriptional and translational shutdown of genes/proteins, with exception of a set of genes/proteins related to LDNs and host-defense system.

Late-onset neonatal sepsis (LONS) remains an important threat to the health of preterm neonates in the neonatal intensive care unit. Strategies to optimize care for preterm neonates with LONS are likely to improve survival and long-term neurocognitive outcomes. However, many important questions on how to improve the prevention, early detection, and therapy for LONS in preterm neonates remain unanswered. This review identifies important knowledge gaps in the management of LONS and describe possible methods and technologies that can be used to resolve these knowledge gaps. The availability of computational medicine and hypothesis-free-omics approaches give way to building bedside feedback tools to guide clinicians in personalized management of LONS. Despite advances in technology, implementation in clinical practice is largely lacking although such tools would help clinicians to optimize many aspects of the management of LONS. We outline which steps are needed to get possible research findings implemented on the neonatal intensive care unit and provide a roadmap for future research initiatives. IMPACT: This review identifies knowledge gaps in prevention, early detection, antibiotic, and additional therapy of late-onset neonatal sepsis in preterm neonates and provides a roadmap for future research efforts. Research opportunities are addressed, which could provide the means to fill knowledge gaps and the steps that need to be made before possible clinical use. Methods to personalize medicine and technologies feasible for bedside clinical use are described.

To compare coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) acute kidney injury (AKI) to sepsis-AKI (S-AKI). The morphology and transcriptomic and proteomic characteristics of autopsy kidneys were analyzed.

Individuals 18 years of age and older who died from COVID-19 and had an autopsy performed at Mayo Clinic between April 2020 to October 2020 were included. Morphological evaluation of the kidneys of 17 individuals with COVID-19 was performed. In a subset of seven COVID-19 cases with postmortem interval of less than or equal to 20 hours, ultrastructural and molecular characteristics (targeted transcriptome and proteomics analyses of tubulointerstitium) were evaluated. Molecular characteristics were compared with archived cases of S-AKI and nonsepsis causes of AKI.

The spectrum of COVID-19 renal pathology included macrophage-dominant microvascular inflammation (glomerulitis and peritubular capillaritis), vascular dysfunction (peritubular capillary congestion and endothelial injury), and tubular injury with ultrastructural evidence of mitochondrial damage. Investigation of the spatial architecture using a novel imaging mass cytometry revealed enrichment of CD3+CD4+ T cells in close proximity to antigen-presenting cells, and macrophage-enriched glomerular and interstitial infiltrates, suggesting an innate and adaptive immune tissue response. Coronavirus disease 2019 AKI and S-AKI, as compared to nonseptic AKI, had an enrichment of transcriptional pathways involved in inflammation (apoptosis, autophagy, major histocompatibility complex class I and II, and type 1 T helper cell differentiation). Proteomic pathway analysis showed that COVID-19 AKI and to a lesser extent S-AKI were enriched in necroptosis and sirtuin-signaling pathways, both involved in regulatory response to inflammation. Upregulation of the ceramide-signaling pathway and downregulation of oxidative phosphorylation in COVID-19 AKI were noted.

This data highlights the similarities between S-AKI and COVID-19 AKI and suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction may play a pivotal role in COVID-19 AKI. This data may allow the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

To examine whether the expressions of 260 organelle crosstalk regulators (OCRGs) in 16 functional groups are modulated in 23 diseases and 28 tumors, we performed extensive -omics data mining analyses and made a set of significant findings: (1) the ratios of upregulated vs. downregulated OCRGs are 1:2.8 in acute inflammations, 1:1 in metabolic diseases, 1:1.2 in autoimmune diseases, and 1:3.8 in organ failures; (2) sepsis and trauma-upregulated OCRG groups such as vesicle, mitochondrial (MT) fission, and mitophagy but not others, are termed as the cell crisis-handling OCRGs. Similarly, sepsis and trauma plus organ failures upregulated seven OCRG groups including vesicle, MT fission, mitophagy, sarcoplasmic reticulum-MT, MT fusion, autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and autophagosome/endosome-lysosome fusion, classified as the cell failure-handling OCRGs; (3) suppression of autophagosome-lysosome fusion in endothelial and epithelial cells is required for viral replications, which classify this decreased group as the viral replication-suppressed OCRGs; (4) pro-atherogenic damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), oxidized-1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (oxPAPC), and interferons (IFNs) totally upregulated 33 OCRGs in endothelial cells (ECs) including vesicle, MT fission, mitophagy, MT fusion, endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-MT contact, ER- plasma membrane (PM) junction, autophagosome/endosome-lysosome fusion, sarcoplasmic reticulum-MT, autophagosome-endosome/lysosome fusion, and ER-Golgi complex (GC) interaction as the 10 EC-activation/inflammation-promoting OCRG groups; (5) the expression of OCRGs is upregulated more than downregulated in regulatory T cells (Tregs) from the lymph nodes, spleen, peripheral blood, intestine, and brown adipose tissue in comparison with that of CD4+CD25- T effector controls; (6) toll-like receptors (TLRs), reactive oxygen species (ROS) regulator nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), and inflammasome-activated regulator caspase-1 regulated the expressions of OCRGs in diseases, virus-infected cells, and pro-atherogenic DAMP-treated ECs; (7) OCRG expressions are significantly modulated in all the 28 cancer datasets, and the upregulated OCRGs are correlated with tumor immune infiltrates in some tumors; (8) tumor promoter factor IKK2 and tumor suppressor Tp53 significantly modulate the expressions of OCRGs. Our findings provide novel insights on the roles of upregulated OCRGs in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases and cancers, and novel pathways for the future therapeutic interventions for inflammations, sepsis, trauma, organ failures, autoimmune diseases, metabolic cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), and cancers.

Septic shock is a systemic inflammatory response syndrome associated with organ failures. Earlier clinical diagnosis would be of benefit to a decrease in the mortality rate. However, there is currently a lack of predictive biomarkers. The secretome is the set of proteins secreted by a cell, tissue, or organism at a given time and under certain conditions. The plasma secretome is easily accessible from biological fluids and represents a good opportunity to discover new biomarkers that can be studied with nontargeted "omic" strategies.

To identify relevant deregulated proteins (DEP) in the secretome of a rat endotoxemic shock model.

Endotoxemic shock was induced in rats by intravenous injection of lipopolysaccharides (LPS, S. enterica typhi, 0.5 mg/kg) and compared to controls (Ringer Lactate, iv). Under isoflurane anesthesia, carotid cannulation allowed mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) and heart rate (HR) monitoring and blood sampling at different time points (T0 and T50 or T0 and T90, with EDTA and protease inhibitor). Samples were prepared for large-scale tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS) based on a label-free quantification to allow identification of the proteins deregulated upon endotoxemic conditions. A Gene Ontology (GO) analysis defined several clusters of biological processes (BP) in which the DEP are involved.

Ninety minutes after shock induction, the LPS group presents a reduction in MAP (-45%, p < 0.05) and increased lactate levels (+27.5%, p < 0.05) compared to the control group. Proteomic analyses revealed 10 and 33 DEP in the LPS group, respectively, at 50 and 90 minutes after LPS injection. At these time points, GO-BP showed alterations in pathways involved in oxidative stress response and coagulation.

This study proposes an approach to identify relevant DEP in septic shock and brings new insights into the understanding of the secretome adaptations upon sepsis.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the third virus that caused coronavirus-related outbreaks over the past 20 years. The outbreak was first reported in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, but rapidly progressed into a pandemic of an unprecedented scale since the 1918 flu pandemic. Besides respiratory complications in patients with COVID-19, clinical characterization of severe infection cases showed several other comorbidities, including multiple organ failure, and septic shock. To better understand the systemic pathogenesis of COVID-19, we interrogated the virus's presence in the peripheral blood cells, which might provide a form of trafficking or hiding to the virus. By analyzing >2 billion sequence reads of high-throughput transcriptome sequence data from 180 samples of patients with active SARS-CoV-2 infection or healthy controls collected from 6 studies, we found evidence of traces of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in two samples from two independent studies. In contrast, the viral RNA was abundant in bronchoalveolar lavage specimens from the same patients. We also devised a "viral spike-to-actin" RNA normalization as a metric to compare across various samples and minimize errors caused by intersample variability in total human RNA abundance. Our observation suggests immune presentation and discounts the possibility of extensive viral infection of lymphocytes or monocytes.

High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) are a class of blood particles, principally involved in mediating reverse cholesterol transport from peripheral tissue to liver. Omics approaches have identified crucial mediators in the HDL proteomic and lipidomic profile, which are involved in distinct pleiotropic functions. Besides their role as cholesterol transporter, HDLs display anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, anti-thrombotic, and anti-infection properties. Experimental and clinical studies have unveiled significant changes in both HDL serum amount and composition that lead to dysregulated host immune response and endothelial dysfunction in the course of sepsis. Most SARS-Coronavirus-2-infected patients admitted to the intensive care unit showed common features of sepsis disease, such as the overwhelmed systemic inflammatory response and the alterations in serum lipid profile. Despite relevant advances, episodes of mild to moderate acute kidney injury (AKI), occurring during systemic inflammatory diseases, are associated with long-term complications, and high risk of mortality. The multi-faceted relationship of kidney dysfunction with dyslipidemia and inflammation encourages to deepen the clarification of the mechanisms connecting these elements. This review analyzes the multifaced roles of HDL in inflammatory diseases, the renal involvement in lipid metabolism, and the novel potential HDL-based therapies.

The aim of this article is to review current and emerging microbiological techniques that support the rapid diagnosis of bacterial infections in critically ill patients, including their performance, strengths and pitfalls, as well as available data evaluating their clinical impact.

Bacterial infections and sepsis are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality in patients admitted to the intensive care unit and their management is further complicated by the increase in the global burden of antimicrobial resistance. In this setting, new diagnostic methods able to overcome the limits of traditional microbiology in terms of turn-around time and accuracy are highly warranted. We discuss the following broad themes: optimisation of existing culture-based methodologies, rapid antigen detection, nucleic acid detection (including multiplex PCR assays and microarrays), sepsis biomarkers, novel methods of pathogen detection (e.g. T2 magnetic resonance) and susceptibility testing (e.g. morphokinetic cellular analysis) and the application of direct metagenomics on clinical samples. The assessment of the host response through new "omics" technologies might also aid in early diagnosis of infections, as well as define non-infectious inflammatory states.

Despite being a promising field, there is still scarce evidence about the real-life impact of these assays on patient management. A common finding of available studies is that the performance of rapid diagnostic strategies highly depends on whether they are integrated within active antimicrobial stewardship programs. Assessing the impact of these emerging diagnostic methods through patient-centred clinical outcomes is a complex challenge for which large and well-designed studies are awaited.

An overview of Prof. Viswanathan Natarajan's journey in academia as a mentor, teacher, and lipid scientist for nearly 50 years is presented. As a graduate student, Dr. Natarajan interrogated biosynthesis and catabolism of phospholipids in the developing brain; however, in the last five decades, he has been investigating the role of sphingolipids and sphingolipid-metabolizing enzymes in pulmonary endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and fibroblasts under normal conditions and during various lung pathologies such as sepsis, asthma, pulmonary hypertension, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and lung cancer. His recent work on sphingosine-1-phosphate and lysophosphatidic acid metabolism in pre-clinical animal models has identified small molecule inhibitors in the signaling pathways that could have therapeutic potential in ameliorating pulmonary fibrosis, hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension, lung cancer, and bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Future research in bioactive lipids in combination with OMICS should unravel the importance of various lipid mediators as modulators of cell function under normal and pathological conditions.

The pathophysiology of sepsis is multi-facetted and highly complex. As sepsis is a leading cause of global mortality that still lacks targeted therapies, increased understanding of its pathogenesis is vital for improving clinical care and outcomes. An increasing number of investigations seeks to unravel the complexity of sepsis through high-dimensional data analysis, enabled by advances in -omics technologies. Here, we summarize progress in the following major -omics fields: genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, lipidomics, and microbiomics. We describe what these fields can teach us about sepsis, and highlight current trends and future challenges. Finally, we focus on multi-omics integration, and discuss the challenges in deriving biological meaning and clinical applications from these types of data.

Introduction: At birth, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is colonized by a complex community of microorganisms, forming the basis of the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome plays a fundamental role in host health, disorders of which can lead to an array of GI diseases, both short and long term. Pediatric GI diseases are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality, but many remain poorly understood. Recent advancements in high-throughput technologies have enabled deeper profiling of GI morbidities. Technologies, such as metagenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, have already been used to identify associations with specific pathologies, and highlight an exciting area of research. However, since these diseases are often complex and multifactorial by nature, reliance on a single experimental approach may not capture the true biological complexity. Therefore, multi-omics aims to integrate singular omic data to further enhance our understanding of disease.Areas covered: This review will discuss and provide an overview of the main omic technologies that are used to study complex GI pathologies in early life.Expert opinion: Multi-omic technologies can help to unravel the complexities of several diseases during early life, aiding in biomarker discovery and enabling the development of novel therapeutics and augment predictive models.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a major problem globally. The main bacterial organisms associated with urinary tract infection (UTI) associated sepsis are E. coli and Klebsiella along with Enterobacter species. These all have AMR strains known as ESBL (Extended Spectrum Beta-Lactamase), which are featured on the WHO priority pathogens list as "critical" for research. Bacteriophages (phages), as viruses that can infect and kill bacteria, could provide an effective tool to tackle these AMR strains. There is currently no "gold standard" for developing a phage cocktail. Here we describe a novel approach to develop an effective phage cocktail against a set of ESBL-producing E. coli and Klebsiella largely isolated from patients in United Kingdom hospitals. By comparing different measures of phage efficacy, we show which are the most robust, and suggest an efficient screening cascade that could be used to develop phage cocktails to target other AMR bacterial species. A target panel of 38 ESBL-producing clinical strains isolated from urine samples was collated and used to test phage efficacy. After an initial screening of 68 phages, six were identified and tested against these 38 strains to determine their clinical coverage and killing efficiency. To achieve this, we assessed four different methods to assess phage virulence across these bacterial isolates. These were the Direct Spot Test (DST), the Efficiency of Plating (EOP) assay, the planktonic killing assay (PKA) and the biofilm assay. The final ESBL cocktail of six phages could effectively kill 23/38 strains (61%), for Klebsiella 13/19 (68%) and for E. coli 10/19 (53%) based on the PKA data. The ESBL E. coli collection had six isolates from the prevalent UTI-associated ST131 sequence type, five of which were targeted effectively by the final cocktail. Of the four methods used to assess phage virulence, the data suggests that PKAs are as effective as the much more time-consuming EOPs and data for the two assays correlates well. This suggests that planktonic killing is a good proxy to determine which phages should be used in a cocktail. This assay when combined with the virulence index also allows "phage synergy" to inform cocktail design.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids are metabolized into regulatory lipids important for initiating inflammatory responses in the event of disease or injury and for signaling the resolution of inflammation and return to homeostasis. The epoxides of linoleic acid (leukotoxins) regulate skin barrier function, perivascular and alveolar permeability and have been associated with poor outcomes in burn patients and in sepsis. It was later reported that blocking metabolism of leukotoxins into the vicinal diols ameliorated the deleterious effects of leukotoxins, suggesting that the leukotoxin diols are contributing to the toxicity. During quantitative profiling of fatty acid chemical mediators (eicosanoids) in COVID-19 patients, we found increases in the regioisomeric leukotoxin diols in plasma samples of hospitalized patients suffering from severe pulmonary involvement. In rodents these leukotoxin diols cause dramatic vascular permeability and are associated with acute adult respiratory like symptoms. Thus, pathways involved in the biosynthesis and degradation of these regulatory lipids should be investigated in larger biomarker studies to determine their significance in COVID-19 disease. In addition, incorporating diols in plasma multi-omics of patients could illuminate the COVID-19 pathological signature along with other lipid mediators and blood chemistry.

Staphylococcus aureus possesses ten extracellular proteases with mostly unknown targets in the human proteome. To assist with bacterial protease target discovery, we have applied and compared two N-terminomics methods to investigate cleavage of human serum proteins by S. aureus V8 protease, discovering 85 host-protein targets. Among these are virulence-relevant complement, iron sequestration, clotting cascade, and host protease inhibitor proteins. Protein cleavage sites have been identified, providing insight into the disruption of host protein function by V8. Complement proteins are cleaved within peptidase and sushi domains, and host protease inhibitors are cleaved outside their protease-trapping motifs. Our data highlight the potential for further application of N-terminomics in discovery of bacterial protease substrates in other host niches and provide omics-scale insight into the role of the V8 protease in S. aureus pathogenesis.

Xuebijing (XBJ) is a traditional Chinese patent medicine for sepsis. However, the mechanism of action (MoA) of XBJ on sepsis remain unclear.

Elucidate the MoA of XBJ for treating sepsis based on network pharmacology.

Integrate computational prediction, experimental validation and literature reported clinical results analysis based on network pharmacology.

Computationally, representative compounds of XBJ were characterized by LC-MS/MS and the target profiles of each compound were identified using network-based method. Compounds from XBJ were compared with FDA approved drugs or experimental agents for sepsis by hierarchical clustering of target profile. Key biological functional modules of XBJ for treating sepsis were identified by enrichment analysis. Differential expressed analysis for each biological functional module was conducted from sepsis related public omics datasets. Herb-biological functional module network was constructed to reveal part of the traditional combinatorial rules of herbs for modules. Experimentally, the action of XBJ compounds on genes in biological functional module was validated by detecting quantitative transcriptional profiling and sepsis animal model. Clinically, combined with the clinical results recorded in literature, computational and experimental results were used to interpret the anti-inflammatory effect of XBJ for treating sepsis.

The target profiles of compound cover most of the compound's related biomolecules reported in literature, which can characterize the comprehensive function of compound. XBJ has similar pharmacological effect as FDA approved drugs or experimental agents. Four key biological functional modules including inflammation, immune, cell apoptosis and coagulation of XBJ for treating sepsis were identified. Cell line experimental results show that part of ingredients in XBJ regulate the expression of genes in inflammation modules as predicted. Animal experiments show that compounds from XBJ could reduce the expression level of IL-1β. Combined with literature reported clinical results, XBJ was found to exert anti-inflammatory effect through regulating the NF-kappa B signaling pathway.

The network pharmacology framework integrating computational prediction, experimental validation and literature reported clinical results analysis provides a novel approach for analyzing MoA of XBJ for treating sepsis.

Bacterial microbiota play a critical role in mediating local and systemic immunity, and shifts in these microbial communities have been linked to impaired outcomes in critical illness. Emerging data indicate that other intestinal organisms, including bacteriophages, viruses of eukaryotes, fungi, and protozoa, are closely interlinked with the bacterial microbiota and their host, yet their collective role during antibiotic perturbation and critical illness remains to be elucidated. We employed multi-omics factor analysis (MOFA) to systematically integrate the bacterial (16S rRNA), fungal (intergenic transcribed spacer 1 rRNA), and viral (virus discovery next-generation sequencing) components of the intestinal microbiota of 33 critically ill patients with and without sepsis and 13 healthy volunteers. In addition, we quantified the absolute abundances of bacteria and fungi using 16S and 18S rRNA PCRs and characterized the short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) butyrate, acetate, and propionate using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. We observe that a loss of the anaerobic intestinal environment is directly correlated with an overgrowth of aerobic pathobionts and their corresponding bacteriophages as well as an absolute enrichment of opportunistic yeasts capable of causing invasive disease. We also observed a strong depletion of SCFAs in both disease states, which was associated with an increased absolute abundance of fungi with respect to bacteria. Therefore, these findings illustrate the complexity of transkingdom changes following disruption of the intestinal bacterial microbiome.IMPORTANCE While numerous studies have characterized antibiotic-induced disruptions of the bacterial microbiome, few studies describe how these disruptions impact the composition of other kingdoms such as viruses, fungi, and protozoa. To address this knowledge gap, we employed MOFA to systematically integrate viral, fungal, and bacterial sequence data from critically ill patients (with and without sepsis) and healthy volunteers, both prior to and following exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics. In doing so, we show that modulation of the bacterial component of the microbiome has implications extending beyond this kingdom alone, enabling the overgrowth of potentially invasive fungi and viruses. While numerous preclinical studies have described similar findings in vitro, we confirm these observations in humans using an integrative analytic approach. These findings underscore the potential value of multi-omics data integration tools in interrogating how different components of the microbiota contribute to disease states. In addition, our findings suggest that there is value in further studying potential adjunctive therapies using anaerobic bacteria or SCFAs to reduce fungal expansion after antibiotic exposure, which could ultimately lead to improved outcomes in the intensive care unit (ICU).

Necrotizing Enterocolitis (NEC) is a catastrophic disease affecting predominantly premature infants and is characterized by high mortality and serious long-term consequences. Traditionally, diagnosis of NEC is based on clinical and radiological findings, which, however, are non-specific for NEC, thus confusing differential diagnosis of other conditions such as neonatal sepsis and spontaneous intestinal perforation. In addition, by the time clinical and radiological findings become apparent, NEC has already progressed to an advanced stage. During the last three decades, a lot of research has focused on the discovery of biomarkers, which could accurately predict and make an early diagnosis of NEC. Biomarkers used thus far in clinical practice include acute phase proteins, inflammation mediators, and molecules involved in the immune response. However, none has been proven accurate enough to predict and make an early diagnosis of NEC or discriminate clinical from surgical NEC or other non-NEC gastrointestinal diseases. Complexity of mechanisms involved in NEC pathogenesis, which remains largely poorly elucidated, could partly explain the unsatisfactory diagnostic performance of the existing NEC biomarkers. More recently applied technics can provide important insight into the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying NEC but can also aid the detection of potentially predictive, early diagnostic, and prognostic biomarkers. Progress in omics technology has allowed for the simultaneous measurement of a large number of proteins, metabolic products, lipids, and genes, using serum/plasma, urine, feces, tissues, and other biological specimens. This review is an update of current data on emerging NEC biomarkers detected using proteomics and metabolomics, further discussing limitations and future perspectives in prediction and early diagnosis of NEC.

Diagnosis and management of patients with septic shock is still a significant challenge for clinicians with its high mortality amongst hospitalized patients. Septic shock is a heterogeneous condition and is usually accompanied by various underlying disease conditions. Dissecting the specific metabolic changes induced by these underlying disease conditions through metabolomics has shown the potential to improve our understanding of the disease's relevant pathophysiological mechanisms, leading to improved treatment. This study has shown the metabolic alterations caused due to co-morbid conditions like diabetes, hypertension, CAD, and CKD in septic shock. It has also shown the distinct metabolic profiles of septic shock patients with underlying respiratory illnesses and encephalopathy. Metabolic profiling of sera obtained from 50 septic shock patients and 20 healthy controls was performed using high-resolution 1D 1H CPMG and diffusion-edited NMR spectra. Univariate and multivariate statistical analyses were performed to identify the potential molecular biomarkers. Noted dysregulations in amino acids, carbohydrates, and lipid metabolism were observed in septic shock patients. Further stratification within the septic shock patients based on co-morbid conditions and primary diagnosis has shown their role in causing metabolic alterations. Evaluation of these compounds during treatment will help design a personalized treatment protocol for the patients, improving therapeutics.

Synovial biopsy techniques have developed and widely expanded over the past few years, in particular due to the development of ultrasound-guided procedures. This article reviews the different techniques, clinical applications, and the latest advances in translational research as well as current challenges and perspectives. The first part focuses on different techniques available for biopsy, along with their feasibility, success rate, tolerance, and training requirements. In the second part, clinical applications are described. Data on diagnostic performances are reported, especially regarding septic arthritis. Translational research applications are described and explained in the final part, from the early histological studies and the first description of pathotype to more recent technologies involving -omics. Latest developments involving single-cell RNA sequence analysis have allowed the discovery of new cell subpopulations with remarkable roles in RA pathophysiology. These studies pave the ground for the discovery of new therapeutic targets and the implementation of personalized therapy in RA. Key Point •This review provides an overview of synovial biopsy techinques and applications especially in clinical and translational research.

The role of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) has been recognized as important, and suppression of HMGB1 release and restoration of vascular barrier integrity are regarded as potentially promising therapeutic strategies against sepsis. Hederacolchiside-E (HCE), namely 3-O-{α-L-rhamnopyranosyl (1→2)-[β-D-glucopyranosyl(1→4)]-α-L-arabinopyranosyl}-28-O-[α-L-rhamnopyranosyl (1→4)-β-D-glucopyranosyl(1→6)-β-D-glucopyranosyl ester, is a bidesmosidic oleanane saponin first isolated in 1970 from the leaves of Hedera colchica. We tested our hypothesis that HCE inhibits HMGB1-induced vascular hyperpermeability and thereby increases the survival of septic mouse model from suppression of HMGB1 release upon lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulation. In LPS-activated human endothelial cells and a sepsis mouse model by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP), antiseptic activity of HCE was investigated from suppression of vascular permeability, pro-inflammatory proteins, and tissue injury markers. Post-treatment of HCE significantly suppressed HMGB1 release both in LPS-activated human endothelial cells and the CLP-induced sepsis mouse model. HCE inhibited hyperpermeability and alleviated HMGB1-mediated vascular disruptions, and reduced sepsis-related mortality and tissue injury in mice. Our results suggest that reduction of HMGB1 release and septic mortality by HCE may be useful for the drug candidate of sepsis, indicating a possibility of successful repositioning of HCE.

Introduction: Sepsis, a dysregulated host response to infection, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Early identification and evidence-based treatment of sepsis are associated with improved outcomes.Areas covered: This narrative review was undertaken following a PubMed search for English language reports published before July 2020 using the terms 'sepsis,' 'septic shock,' 'fluids,' 'fluid therapy,' 'albumin,' 'corticosteroids,' 'vasopressor.' Emerging management strategies were identified following a search of the ClinicalTrails.gov database using the term 'sepsis.' Additional reports were identified by examining the reference lists of selected articles and based on personnel knowledge of the field of sepsis.Expert opinion: The core treatment of sepsis relies on source control, early antibiotics, and organ support. The main emerging strategies focus on immunomodulation, artificial intelligence, and on multi-omics approaches for a personalized therapy.

oposSOM is a comprehensive, machine learning based open-source data analysis software combining functionalities such as diversity analyses, biomarker selection, function mining, and visualization.

These functionalities are now available as interactive web-browser application for a broader user audience interested in extracting detailed information from high-throughput omics data sets pre-processed by oposSOM. It enables interactive browsing of single-gene and gene set profiles, of molecular 'portrait landscapes', of associated phenotype diversity, and signalling pathway activation patterns.

The oposSOM-Browser makes available interactive data browsing for five transcriptome data sets of cancer (melanomas, B-cell lymphomas, gliomas) and of peripheral blood (sepsis and healthy individuals) at www.izbi.uni-leipzig.de/opossom-browser .

Sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (S-AKI) is the most common complication in hospitalized and critically ill patients, highlighted by a rapid decline of kidney function occurring a few hours or days after sepsis onset. Systemic inflammation elicited by microbial infections is believed to lead to kidney damage under immunocompromised conditions. However, although AKI has been recognized as a disease with long-term sequelae, partly because of the associated higher risk of chronic kidney disease (CKD), the understanding of kidney pathophysiology at the molecular level and the global view of dynamic regulations in situ after S-AKI, including the transition to CKD, remains limited. Existing studies of S-AKI mainly focus on deriving sepsis biomarkers from body fluids. In the present study, we constructed a mid-severity septic murine model using cecal ligation and puncture (CLP), and examined the temporal changes to the kidney proteome and phosphoproteome at day 2 and day 7 after CLP surgery, corresponding to S-AKI and the transition to CKD, respectively, by employing an ultrafast and economical filter-based sample processing method combined with the label-free quantitation approach. Collectively, we identified 2,119 proteins and 2950 phosphosites through multi-proteomics analyses. Among them, we identified an array of highly promising candidate marker proteins indicative of disease onset and progression accompanied by immunoblot validations, and further denoted the pathways that are specifically responsive to S-AKI and its transition to CKD, which include regulation of cell metabolism regulation, oxidative stress, and energy consumption in the diseased kidneys. Our data can serve as an enriched resource for the identification of mechanisms and biomarkers for sepsis-induced kidney diseases.

Rationale: Pendrin is encoded by SLC26A4 and its mutation leads to congenital hearing loss. Additionally, pendrin is up-regulated in inflammatory airway diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, allergic rhinitis, and asthma. In this study, the effects of a novel pendrin inhibitor, YS-01, were investigated in an LPS-induced acute lung injury (ALI) mice model, and the mechanism underlying the effect of YS-01 was examined. Methods: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 10 mg/kg) was intranasally instilled in wild type (WT) and pendrin-null mice. YS-01 (10 mg/kg) was administered intra-peritoneally before or after LPS inhalation. Lung injury parameters were assessed in the lung tissue and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Pendrin levels in the BALF of 41 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to pneumonia and 25 control (solitary pulmonary nodule) patients were also measured. Results: LPS instillation induced lung injury in WT mice but not in pendrin-null mice. Pendrin expression was increased by LPS stimulation both in vitro and in vivo. YS-01 treatment dramatically attenuated lung injury and reduced BALF cell counts and protein concentration after LPS instillation in WT mice. Proinflammatory cytokines and NF-κB activation were suppressed by YS-01 treatment in LPS-induced ALI mice. In BALF of patients whose ARDS was caused by pneumonia, pendrin expression was up-regulated compared to that in controls (mean, 24.86 vs. 6.83 ng/mL, P < 0.001). Conclusions: A novel pendrin inhibitor, YS-01, suppressed lung injury in LPS-induced ALI mice and our data provide a new strategy for the treatment of inflammatory airway diseases including sepsis-induced ALI.

Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia (SaB) causes significant disease in humans, carrying mortality rates of ∼25%. The ability to rapidly predict SaB patient responses and guide personalized treatment regimens could reduce mortality. Here, we present a resource of SaB prognostic biomarkers. Integrating proteomic and metabolomic techniques enabled the identification of >10,000 features from >200 serum samples collected upon clinical presentation. We interrogated the complexity of serum using multiple computational strategies, which provided a comprehensive view of the early host response to infection. Our biomarkers exceed the predictive capabilities of those previously reported, particularly when used in combination. Last, we validated the biological contribution of mortality-associated pathways using a murine model of SaB. Our findings represent a starting point for the development of a prognostic test for identifying high-risk patients at a time early enough to trigger intensive monitoring and interventions.

Wnt5a/Wnt11 can be used as potential ARDS biomarkers for SARS-CoV-2 patients https://bit.ly/3lxEGRA

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has spread globally, resulting in declaration of pandemic emergency [1]. COVID-19 patients suffer from various symptoms of infection, including pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and sepsis. Some known antiviral drugs, including remdesivir, have been proposed as effective agents for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection [2, 3]. Along with the development of potential therapeutics, there is urgency to mitigate the transmission and economic crisis of SARS-CoV-2 via identification of biomarkers that can rapidly indicate the severity of the disease in infected patients. Wnt ligands are secreted glycoproteins and their downstream signalling plays a pivotal role in embryonic development and tissue homeostasis.

Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is a common cause of pneumonia-derived sepsis in human and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. The microbiota promotes and maintains host immune homeostasis during bacterial infections. However, the mechanisms by which the gut microbiota affects immune responses in the lung still remain poorly understood. Here, we performed cecal metabolomics sequencing and fecal 16s rRNA sequencing in K. pneumoniae-infected mice and uninfected controls and showed that K. pneumoniae infection led to profound alterations in the gut microbiome and thus the cecal metabolome. We observed that the levels of Lactobacillus reuteri and Bifidobacterium pseudolongum were significantly decreased in K. pneumoniae-infected mice. Spearman correlation analysis showed that alterations in the richness and composition of the gut microbiota were associated with profound changes in host metabolite concentrations. Further, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including acetate, propionate, and butyrate, were detected in cecal contents and serum by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). We observed that the concentrations of these three SCFAs were all lower in the infected groups than in the untreated controls. Lastly, oral supplementation with these three SCFAs reduced susceptibility to K. pneumoniae infections, as indicated by lower bacterial burdens in the lung and higher survival rates. Our data highlight the protective roles of gut microbiota and certain metabolites in K. pneumoniae-pneumonia and suggests that it is possible to intervene in this bacterial pneumonia by targeting the gut microbiota.

Bacterial sepsis affects both neonates and adults worldwide. There is no specific anti-sepsis treatment. Disease management mainly depends on early diagnosis. The gold standard blood culturing method is routinely practiced; it requires 24-48 h for confirmation. Understanding the disease mechanism may help in the early detection of sepsis. We studied the temporal change in NF-kB pathway genes in adult whole blood upon bacterial stimulations across time intervals (2-6 h). Four experimental conditions were investigated (1: Gram-positive, 2: Gram-negative, 3: Gram-positive + Gram-negative stimulated and compared with 4: un-stimulated group) to show host selection of canonical or non-canonical pathway against invading pathogens. Gene expression analysis showed significant variations (p < 0.5) in TLR2, TLR4, TRAF6, NIK, RelA, and RelB upon bacterial stimulants. Further, the correlation analysis showed the coherent behaviour of genes in selecting the canonical or non-canonical pathway. TLR2 sensed by gram-positive bacteria that immediately activates the canonical pathway through RelA, whereas other bacterial stimulants activate the non-canonical pathway via TLR4, NIK, and RelB. In addition, the inflammatory markers showed a significant increase in response to bacterial stimulants, suggesting the immediate activation of innate immunity. Overall, our results show the bacterial specific and time-dependent activation of the NF-kB pathway, which through a light towards the early detection of bacterial sepsis.

Introduction: Fever of unknown origin (FUO) and hemodynamic instability are complications that develop after cardiac surgery combined with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) for heart disease. Patients who develop fever with hemodynamic instability after cardiac surgery may have systemic inflammatory response syndrome or sepsis. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a technique that temporarily takes over the function of the heart and lungs during cardiac surgery. Recent reports suggest that early bloodstream infections of patients undergoing CPB are due to gram-negative bacteria that are present in the intestinal flora. The theory of intestinal flora translocation has growing evidence. Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion that occurs during cardiac surgery with CPB will induce a systemic inflammatory reaction and may cause intestinal flora translocation. Does this systemic reaction cause sepsis? We therefore propose this protocol to determine whether the changes in the intestinal flora in patients after cardiac surgery with CPB are related to sepsis. Methods and Analysis: This study is a prospective observational case-control study to analyze the variation in the intestinal microflora and metabolites in patients undergoing cardiac surgery with CPB and to observe the outcomes of patients with routine clinical interventions. The control group will include healthy people without intestinal illness. Feces and blood samples will be acquired 1 day before cardiac surgery and within 24-72 h after cardiac surgery, and will be used for genomics and metabolomics analyses. Demographic data describing age, sex, main diagnosis, and past medical history and data related to the CPB time and application of antibiotics are available. Sequential (sepsis-related) organ failure assessment, infection-related laboratory items, infection site, and pathogenic microorganisms, and nutrition, and gastrointestinal function assessment are additionally recorded. Group analysis of data will be conducted according to the outcomes (sepsis vs. non-sepsis and survivors vs. non-survivors). Ethics and Dissemination: This protocol has been ethically approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking Union Medical College (ID: ZS-1612). Informed consent will be obtained before subject enrolment, and data will be stored in a secured database. The results will be submitted to international peer-reviewed journals and presented at international conferences. Trial Registration Number: NCT04032938.

Candidiasis is the most common fungal infection affecting hospitalized patients, especially immunocompromised and critical patients. Limitations regarding the assertive diagnosis of both Candidemia and Candidiasis not only impairs the introduction of effective treatments but also lays a heavy financial burden over the health system. Furthermore, it is still challenging to ascertain whether diagnostic methods are accurate and whether treatment is effective for patients with Candidemia. These constraints come from the uncertainty of the pathophysiological mechanism by which the pathogen establishes the opportunistic infection. Additionally, it is the reason why some patients present positive blood culture results, and others do not, and why it is very difficult during clinical routines to prove Candidemia or invasive candidiasis. Taking into account the current situation, this contribution proposes two markers that may help to understand the mechanisms of infection by the pathogen: Leukotriene F4 and 5,6-dihydroxy-eicosatetraenoic. These two lipids putatively modulate the host's immune response, and the initial data presented in this contribution suggest that these lipids allow the opportunistic infection to be installed. The study was carried out using an omics-based platform using direct-infusion high-resolution mass spectrometry and allied with bioinformatics tools to provide accurate and reliable results for biomarker candidates screening.

Sepsis is a highly heterogenous syndrome with variable causes and outcomes. As part of the SPHN/PHRT funding program, we aim to build a highly interoperable, interconnected network for data collection, exchange and analysis of patients on intensive care units in order to predict sepsis onset and mortality earlier. All five University Hospitals, Universities, the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics and ETH Zurich are involved in this multi-disciplinary project. With two prospective clinical observational studies, we test our infrastructure setup and improve the framework gradually and generate relevant data for research.

Early, ideally pre-symptomatic, recognition of common diseases (e.g., heart disease, cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer's disease) facilitates early treatment or lifestyle modifications, such as diet and exercise. Sensitive, specific identification of diseases using blood samples would facilitate early recognition. We explored the potential of disease identification in high dimensional blood microRNA (miRNA) datasets using a powerful data reduction method: principal component analysis (PCA). Using Qlucore Omics Explorer (QOE), a dynamic, interactive visualization-guided bioinformatics program with a built-in statistical platform, we analyzed publicly available blood miRNA datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) maintained at the National Center for Biotechnology Information at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The miRNA expression profiles were generated from real time PCR arrays, microarrays or next generation sequencing of biologic materials (e.g., blood, serum or blood components such as platelets). PCA identified the top three principal components that distinguished cohorts of patients with specific diseases (e.g., heart disease, stroke, hypertension, sepsis, diabetes, specific types of cancer, HIV, hemophilia, subtypes of meningitis, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment, aging, and autism), from healthy subjects. Literature searches verified the functional relevance of the discriminating miRNAs. Our goal is to assemble PCA and heatmap analyses of existing and future blood miRNA datasets into a clinical reference database to facilitate the diagnosis of diseases using routine blood draws.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a clinical syndrome that inflicts a considerably heavy toll in terms of morbidity and mortality. While there are multitudes of conditions that can lead to ARDS, the vast majority of ARDS cases are caused by a relatively small number of diseases, especially sepsis and pneumonia. Currently, there is no clinically agreed upon reliable diagnostic test for ARDS, and the detection or diagnosis of ARDS is based on a constellation of laboratory and radiological tests in the absence of evidence of left ventricular dysfunction, as specified by the Berlin definition of ARDS. Virtually all the ARDS biomarkers to date have been proven to be of very limited clinical utility. Given the heterogeneity of ARDS due to the wide variation in etiology, clinical and molecular manifestations, there is a current scientific consensus agreement that ARDS is not just a single entity but rather a spectrum of conditions that need further study for proper classification, the identification of reliable biomarkers and the adequate institution of therapeutic targets. This scoping review aims to elucidate ARDS omics research, focusing on metabolomics and how metabolomics can boost the study of ARDS biomarkers and help to facilitate the identification of ARDS subpopulations.

Rapid and accurate diagnosis of sepsis remains clinically challenging. The lack of specific biomarkers that can differentiate sepsis from non-infectious systemic inflammatory diseases often leads to excessive antibiotic treatment. Novel diagnostic tests are urgently needed to rapidly and accurately diagnose sepsis and enable effective treatment. Despite investment in cutting-edge technologies available today, the discovery of disease-specific biomarkers in blood remains extremely difficult. The highly dynamic environment of plasma restricts access to vital diagnostic information that can be obtained by proteomic analysis. Here, we employed clinically used lipid-based nanoparticles (AmBisome®) as an enrichment platform to analyze the human plasma proteome in the setting of sepsis. We exploited the spontaneous interaction of plasma proteins with nanoparticles (NPs) once in contact, called the 'protein corona', to discover previously unknown disease-specific biomarkers for sepsis diagnosis. Plasma samples obtained from non-infectious acute systemic inflammation controls and sepsis patients were incubated ex vivo with AmBisome® liposomes, and the resultant protein coronas were thoroughly characterised and compared by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Our results demonstrate that the proposed nanoparticle enrichment technology enabled the discovery of 67 potential biomarker proteins that could reproducibly differentiate non-infectious acute systemic inflammation from sepsis. This study provides proof-of-concept evidence that nanoscale-based 'omics' enrichment technologies have the potential to substantially improve plasma proteomics analysis and to uncover novel biomarkers in a challenging clinical setting.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is common in critically ill children and adults, and sepsis-associated AKI (SA-AKI) is the most frequent cause of AKI in the ICU. To date, no mechanistically targeted therapeutic interventions have been identified. High-throughput "omic" technologies (e.g., genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc.) offer a new angle of approach to achieve this end. In this review, we provide an update on the current understanding of SA-AKI pathophysiology. Omic technologies themselves are briefly discussed to facilitate interpretation of studies using them. We next summarize the body of SA-AKI research to date that has employed omic technologies. Importantly, omic studies are helping to elucidate a pathophysiology of SA-AKI centered around cellular stress responses, metabolic changes, and dysregulation of energy production that underlie its clinical features. Finally, we propose opportunities for future research using clinically relevant animal models, integrating multiple omic technologies and ultimately progressing to translational human studies focusing therapeutic strategies on targeted disease mechanisms.

Lipoproteins were initially defined according to their composition (lipids and proteins) and classified according to their density (from very low- to high-density lipoproteins-HDLs). Whereas their capacity to transport hydrophobic lipids in a hydrophilic environment (plasma) is not questionable, their primitive function of cholesterol transporter could be challenged. All lipoproteins are reported to bind and potentially neutralize bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS); this is particularly true for HDL particles. In addition, HDL levels are drastically decreased under infectious conditions such as sepsis, suggesting a potential role in the clearance of bacterial material and, particularly, LPS. Moreover, "omics" technologies have unveiled significant changes in HDL composition in different inflammatory states, ranging from acute inflammation occurring during septic shock to low-grade inflammation associated with moderate endotoxemia such as periodontal disease or obesity. In this review, we will discuss HDL modifications associated with exposure to pathogens including bacteria, viruses and parasites, with a special focus on sepsis and the potential of HDL therapy in this context. Low-grade inflammation associated with atherosclerosis, periodontitis or metabolic syndrome may also highlight the protective role of HDLs in theses pathologies by other mechanisms than the reverse transport of cholesterol.

Sepsis is a potentially fatal complication of infections and there are currently no effective therapeutic options for severe sepsis. In this study, we revealed the secretion mechanism of transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) that was recently identified as a therapeutic target for sepsis, and designed TGFBIp acetylation inhibitory peptide (TAIP) that suppresses acetylation of lysine 676 in TGFBIp. To improve bioavailability and biodegradation of the peptide, TAIP was conjugated to polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers. Additionally, the cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) was conjugated to the TAIP-modified PAMAM dendrimers for the intracellular delivery of TGFBIp. The resulting nanostructures, decorated with TAIP and CPP via poly(ethylene glycol) linkage, improved the mortality and organ damage in the septic mouse model and suppressed lipopolysaccharide-activated severe vascular inflammatory responses in endothelial cells. Thus, the dendrimer-based nanostructures for delivery of TAIP using CPP show great promise in practical applications in sepsis therapy.

In the last years, 'omics' technologies, and especially metabolomics, emerged as expanding scientific disciplines and promising technologies in the characterization of several pathophysiological processes.In detail, metabolomics, able to detect in a dynamic way the whole set of molecules of low molecular weight in cells, tissues, organs, and biological fluids, can provide a detailed phenotypic portray, representing a metabolic "snapshot."Thanks to its numerous strength points, metabolomics could become a fundamental tool in human health, allowing the exact evaluation of individual metabolic responses to pathophysiological stimuli including drugs, environmental changes, lifestyle, a great number of diseases and other epigenetics factors.Moreover, if current metabolomics data will be confirmed on larger samples, such technology could become useful in the early diagnosis of diseases, maybe even before the clinical onset, allowing a clinical monitoring of disease progression and helping in performing the best therapeutic approach, potentially predicting the therapy response and avoiding overtreatments. Moreover, the application of metabolomics in nutrition could provide significant information on the best nutrition regimen, optimal infantile growth and even in the characterization and improvement of commercial products' composition.These are only some of the fields in which metabolomics was applied, in the perspective of a precision-based, personalized care of human health.In this review, we discuss the available literature on such topic and provide some evidence regarding clinical application of metabolomics in heart diseases, auditory disturbance, nephrouropathies, adult and pediatric cancer, obstetrics, perinatal conditions like asphyxia, neonatal nutrition, neonatal sepsis and even some neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism.Our research group has been interested in metabolomics since several years, performing a wide spectrum of experimental and clinical studies, including the first metabolomics analysis of human breast milk. In the future, it is reasonable to predict that the current knowledge could be applied in daily clinical practice, and that sensible metabolomics biomarkers could be easily detected through cheap and accurate sticks, evaluating biofluids at the patient's bed, improving diagnosis, management and prognosis of sick patients and allowing a personalized medicine. A dream? May be I am a dreamer, but I am not the only one.

Maslinic acid (MA), a natural triterpenoid from Olea europaea, prevents oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokine generation. High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) has been recognized as a late mediator of sepsis, and the inhibition of the release of HMGB1 and the recovery of vascular barrier integrity have emerged as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of sepsis.

We tested the hypothesis that MA induces sirtuin 1 and heme oxygenase-1, which inhibit the release of HMGB1 in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated cells, thus inhibiting HMGB1-induced hyperpermeability and increasing the survival of septic mice. MA was administered after LPS or HMGB1 challenge, and the antiseptic activity of MA was determined based on permeability, the activation of pro-inflammatory proteins, and the production of markers for tissue injury in HMGB1-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and a cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced sepsis mouse model.

MA significantly reduced the release of HMGB1 in LPS-activated HUVECs and attenuated the CLP-induced release of HMGB1. Additionally, MA alleviated HMGB1-mediated vascular disruption and inhibited hyperpermeability in mice, and in vivo analysis revealed that MA reduced sepsis-related mortality and tissue injury.

Taken together, the present results suggest that MA reduced HMGB1 release and septic mortality and thus may be useful in the treatment of sepsis.

Dissemination and exploitation of knowledge regarding affordable clinical skills and innovative precision medicine, two current topics in active development in medicine, may contribute to improve also sepsis management. Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction due to a dysregulated host response to infection. Sepsis is strongly related to all body organs or to systemic diseases and to the quality of the best-practice in use, which is particularly critical in surgical or intervention techniques. Trauma, surgical and mini-invasive procedures, vascular or endoscopic interventions, otolaryngology, obstetrics-gynecological and urological procedures, malnutrition, dental, skin, chronic liver, kidney and respiratory disease are frequently involved. Accordingly, apart from the clinical risk analysis and management of the process of care, the actual factors that may be easily neglected are the techniques used, the personal skills of the health professionals and the quality of the equipment. The quest for biomarkers consistent with the unmet needs of medical doctors and of their patient and the efforts for overcoming bacterial antibiotic resistances are currently the main foci of medical research. In addition, in this regard, research and innovation would benefit from greater knowledge, skills and use of bioinformatics and omics. The caveats related to in-silico approaches must be flagged: algorithms may equally warrant scientific innovations or hide the lack of them; a patient is more than a set of covariates. Epidemiology and prevention includes all the actions suitable for achieving an adequate hygiene and immunization of populations and for safer hospital policies and procedures during Patients' stays. In any subset, the most unresolved critical point in sepsis is a timely diagnosis. This is impaired by low degrees of suspicion for the possibility of emerging sepsis, by the shortage of use of the simplest microbiological testing but, equally or more, by the insufficient diffusion of non-invasive imaging skills suitable to detect and monitor the emerging sites and sources of infection. In primary care, in emergency facilities, in hospital wards and in intensive care units, inclusion of appropriate knowledge, skills, expertise and imaging equipment must be extended as much as possible. The low cost of UltraSound machines and of increasing bioinformatics literacy by e-learning, makes such investments affordable even in limited-resources contexts. Frontier educational and best practice intervention enhancing affordable clinical skills and innovative precision medicine may lead beyond the boundaries of fatal outcomes in sepsis.

Human endothelial cells-derived polyphosphate (PolyP) is one of the pro-inflammatory mediators as suggested by the previous reports. Aloin is the major anthraquinone glycoside obtained from the Aloe species and exhibits anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities. Aloin inhibits PolyP-mediated barrier disruption, the expressions of cell adhesion molecules, and adhesion/migration of leukocyte to HUVEC. PolyP-induced NF-κB activation and the productions of TNF-α and IL-6 were inhibited by aloin in HUVECs. These anti-inflammatory functions of aloin were confirmed in PolyP-injected mice. In conclusion, based on the anti-inflammatory effects of aloin in PolyP-mediated septic response, aloin has therapeutic potential for various systemic inflammatory diseases.

Introduction: Mortality due to sepsis is still prevalent, peaking at extreme ages of life including infancy. Despite many efforts, the peculiarity of the infant immune system has limited further advances in its treatment. Indeed, neonates experience a dramatic physiological transition from immune tolerance to the maternal antigens to functional maturity. Such a transition is extremely dynamic, as is the pathophysiology of infant sepsis, which is dependent on many infant, maternal, and environmental factors.Areas covered: In this review, the authors critically update and summarize the current paradigm of immunomodulation in infant sepsis. They confirm how exogenous stimulation of the immune system through intravenous immunoglobulin, colony stimulating factors, and granulocyte transfusion have failed to impact on the prognosis of infant sepsis. They also strongly support the beneficial effects of supplementation/replacement therapies with products naturally contained within maternal milk as well as antioxidant compounds.Expert opinion: Breastfeeding is beneficial against sepsis. Knowledge of the neonatal immune system is indeed too limited to effectively strengthen immune response by exogenous interventions, especially in preterm and low-birth-weight infants. Awareness of this limitation should pave the way for future studies (e.g. gender- and omics-based) aimed at better characterizing the infant immune system and promoting a more tailored approach.

Aloin is the major anthraquinone glycoside obtained from the Aloe species. Transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein and released by primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. We hypothesized that aloin could reduce TGFBIp-mediated severe inflammatory responses in HUVECs and mice. Aloin effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced release of TGFBIp and suppressed TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. Aloin suppressed TGFBIp-induced sepsis lethality and pulmonary injury. Therefore, aloin is a potential therapeutic agent for various severe vascular inflammatory diseases, with inhibition of the TGFBIp signaling pathway as the mechanism of action. [Formula: see text].

We examined the effects of a 2,2'-bipyridine containing natural product, collismycin C on high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1, septic mediator)-mediated septic responses and survival rate in a mouse sepsis model. Collismycin C inhibited the HMGB1 release and downregulated HMGB1-mediated inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells. Collismycin C also inhibited HMGB1-induced hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, collismycin C treatment reduced CLP-induced HMGB1 release and sepsis-related mortality and pulmonary damage in vivo. Our results indicate that collismycin C is a potential therapeutic agent for the treatment of severe vascular inflammatory diseases by inhibiting HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein; its expression by several cell types is greatly increased by TGF-β. TGFBIp is released by primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. 2,2'-Bipyridine-containing natural products are generally accepted to have antimicrobial, cytotoxic and anti-inflammatory properties. We hypothesized that a 2,2'-bipyridine containing natural product, collismycin C, could reduce TGFBIp-mediated severe inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells and mice. Here we investigated the effects and underlying mechanisms of collismycin C against TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. Collismycin C effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced release of TGFBIp and suppressed TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. In addition, collismycin C suppressed TGFBIp-induced sepsis lethality and pulmonary injury. This suppression of TGFBIp-mediated and CLP-induced septic responses indicates that collismycin C is a potential therapeutic agent for various severe vascular inflammatory diseases, with inhibition of the TGFBIp signaling pathway as the mechanism of action.

Early etiological diagnosis and characterization of host response to infection are becoming central in sepsis recognition and management. Still, limitations in conventional diagnosis and patient stratification contribute to the high mortality rates among septic patients, despite new antimicrobials and resuscitation agents. Novel microbiological techniques and omics analyses have led to the development of several tests that are now commercially available or in the pipeline as rapid diagnostic tools. We first reviewed emerging assays for the etiological diagnosis of sepsis starting directly from whole blood, assays based on target-specific polymerase chain reaction or metagenomics. We then investigated results of different omics approaches for both bedside diagnosis of immune dysfunction and detection of patient "signatures" associated with different clinical outcomes or potential response to individualized therapies. Finally, we considered how these novel laboratory tools might be translated into clinical practice, noting that they perform best when integrated within antimicrobial stewardship programs.

A potential role for the long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase family member 1 (ACSL1) in the immunobiology of sepsis was explored during a hands-on training workshop. Participants first assessed the robustness of the potential gap in biomedical knowledge identified via an initial screen of public transcriptome data and of the literature associated with ACSL1. Increase in ACSL1 transcript abundance during sepsis was confirmed in several independent datasets. Querying the ACSL1 literature also confirmed the absence of reports associating ACSL1 with sepsis. Inferences drawn from both the literature (via indirect associations) and public transcriptome data (via correlation) point to the likely participation of ACSL1 and ACSL4, another family member, in inflammasome activation in neutrophils during sepsis. Furthermore, available clinical data indicate that levels of ACSL1 and ACSL4 induction was significantly higher in fatal cases of sepsis. This denotes potential translational relevance and is consistent with involvement in pathways driving potentially deleterious systemic inflammation. Finally, while ACSL1 expression was induced in blood in vitro by a wide range of pathogen-derived factors as well as TNF, induction of ACSL4 appeared restricted to flagellated bacteria and pathogen-derived TLR5 agonists and IFNG. Taken together, this joint review of public literature and omics data records points to two members of the acyl-CoA synthetase family potentially playing a role in inflammasome activation in neutrophils. Translational relevance of these observations in the context of sepsis and other inflammatory conditions remain to be investigated.

The Warburg effect, which originally described increased production of lactate in cancer, is associated with diverse cellular processes such as angiogenesis, hypoxia, polarization of macrophages and activation of T cells. This phenomenon is intimately linked to several diseases including neoplasia, sepsis and autoimmune diseases1,2. Lactate, which is converted from pyruvate in tumour cells, is widely known as an energy source and metabolic by-product. However, its non-metabolic functions in physiology and disease remain unknown. Here we show that lactate-derived lactylation of histone lysine residues serves as an epigenetic modification that directly stimulates gene transcription from chromatin. We identify 28 lactylation sites on core histones in human and mouse cells. Hypoxia and bacterial challenges induce the production of lactate by glycolysis, and this acts as a precursor that stimulates histone lactylation. Using M1 macrophages that have been exposed to bacteria as a model system, we show that histone lactylation has different temporal dynamics from acetylation. In the late phase of M1 macrophage polarization, increased histone lactylation induces homeostatic genes that are involved in wound healing, including Arg1. Collectively, our results suggest that an endogenous 'lactate clock' in bacterially challenged M1 macrophages turns on gene expression to promote homeostasis. Histone lactylation thus represents an opportunity to improve our understanding of the functions of lactate and its role in diverse pathophysiological conditions, including infection and cancer.

Medical decision-making is revolutionizing with the introduction of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Yet, traditional algorithms using biomarkers to optimize drug treatment continue to be important and necessary. In this context, early diagnosis and rational antimicrobial therapy of sepsis and lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) are vital to prevent morbidity and mortality. In this study we report an original cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) of using a procalcitonin (PCT)-based decision algorithm to guide antibiotic prescription for hospitalized sepsis and LRTI patients versus standard care. We conducted a CEA using a decision-tree model before and after the implementation of PCT-guided antibiotic stewardship (ABS) using real-world U.S. hospital-specific data. The CEA included societal and hospital perspectives with the time horizon covering the length of hospital stay. The main outcomes were average total costs per patient, and numbers of patients with Clostridium difficile and antibiotic resistance (ABR) infections. We found that health care with the PCT decision algorithm for hospitalized sepsis and LRTI patients resulted in shorter length of stay, reduced antibiotic use, fewer mechanical ventilation days, and lower numbers of patients with C. difficile and ABR infections. The PCT-guided health care resulted in cost savings of $25,611 (49% reduction from standard care) for sepsis and $3630 (23% reduction) for LRTI, on average per patient. In conclusion, the PCT decision algorithm for ABS in sepsis and LRTI might offer cost savings in comparison with standard care in a U.S. hospital context. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first health economic analysis on PCT implementation using U.S. real-world data. We suggest that future CEA studies in other U.S. and worldwide settings are warranted in the current age when PCT and other decision algorithms are increasingly deployed in precision therapeutics and evidence-based medicine.

Sepsis is a severe disease frequently occurred in the Intenisive Care Unit (ICU), which has a very high morbidity and mortality, especially in patients aged over 65 years. Owing to the aging effect and the ensuing deterioration of body function, the elder patients may have atypical responses to sepsis. Diagnosis and pathogenesis of sepsis in this population are thus difficult, which hindered effective treatment and management in clinic. To investigated age effects on sepsis, 158 elderly septic patients and 71 non-septic elderly participants were enrolled, and their plasma samples were collected for transcriptomics (RNA-seq) and metabolomics (NMR and GC-MS) analyses, which are both increasingly being utilized to discover key molecular changes and potential biomarkers for various diseases. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was subsequently performed to assist cross-platform integration. Real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used for validation of RNA-seq results. For further understanding of the mechanisms, cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) experiment was performed both in young and middle-aged rats, which were subjected to NMR-based metabolomics study and validated for several key inflammation pathways by western blot. Comprehensive analysis of data from the two omics approaches provides a systematic perspective on dysregulated pathways that could facilitate the development of therapy and biomarkers for elderly sepsis. Additionally, the metabolites of lactate, arginine, histamine, tyrosine, glutamate and glucose were shown to be highly specific and sensitive in distinguishing septic patients from healthy controls. Significant increases of arginine, trimethylamine N-oxide and allantoin characterized elderly patient incurred sepsis. Further analytical and biological validations in different subpopulations of septic patients should be carried out, allowing accurate diagnostics and precise treatment of sepsis in clinic.

Toll-like receptor (TLR)/myeloid differentiation primary response protein (MYD88) signaling aggravates sepsis by impairing neutrophil migration to infection sites. However, the role of intracellular fatty acids in TLR/MYD88 signaling is unclear. Here, inhibition of fatty acid synthase by C75 improved neutrophil chemotaxis and increased the survival of mice with sepsis in cecal ligation puncture and lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock models. C75 specifically blocked TLR/MYD88 signaling in neutrophils. Treatment with GSK2194069 that targets a different domain of fatty acid synthase, did not block TLR signaling or MYD88 palmitoylation. De novo fatty acid synthesis and CD36-mediated exogenous fatty acid incorporation contributed to MYD88 palmitoylation. The binding of IRAK4 to the MYD88 intermediate domain and downstream signal activation required MYD88 palmitoylation at cysteine 113. MYD88 was palmitoylated by ZDHHC6, and ZDHHC6 knockdown decreased MYD88 palmitoylation and TLR/MYD88 activation upon lipopolysaccharide stimulus. Thus, intracellular saturated fatty acid-dependent palmitoylation of MYD88 by ZDHHC6 is a therapeutic target of sepsis.

Probiotics have been explored in an exponentially increasing number of clinical trials for their health effects. Drawing conclusions from the published literature for the medical practitioner is difficult since rarely more than two clinical trials were conducted with the same probiotic strain against the same medical condition. Consequently, the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) made a few recommendations restricting it to probiotic use against acute gastroenteritis and antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Recent studies also made a strong case for probiotic use against sepsis in preterm and term infants from developing countries. Conclusions on the value of probiotics are best based on detailed meta-analyses (MA) of randomized controlled trials (RCT). Outcomes of MA are discussed in the present review for a number of gastroenterology conditions. Since these MA pool data from trials using different probiotic species, large RCT published sometimes come to different conclusions than MA including these studies. This is not necessarily a contradiction but may only mean that the specific probiotic species did not work under the specified conditions. Positive or negative generalization about probiotics and prebiotics should be avoided. Credible effects are those confirmed in independent trials with a specified probiotic strain or chemically defined prebiotic in a specified patient population under the specified treatment conditions. Even distinct technological preparations of the same probiotic strain might affect clinical outcomes if they alter bacterial surface structures. Underpowered clinical trials are another problem in the probiotic field. Data obtained with sophisticated omics technologies, but derived from less than ten human subjects should be interpreted with caution even when published in high impact journals.

Introduction: Despite considerable advances in our understanding of how sepsis develops and multiple clinical trials of potential therapies, no new pharmacologic agent has been consistently shown to improve survival. Areas covered: We reviewed relevant publications identified through PubMed and from the authors' knowledge of this field. We discuss the main reasons why clinical trials on new therapeutic interventions have failed in the past, including heterogeneity of study populations and choice of outcome measures. We discuss how changes in study design and in patient selection could help improve identification of effective agents in the future. Expert opinion: The search for new sepsis therapies must continue but lessons must be learned from previous clinical trials so that the same mistakes are not repeated. Rather than grouping all patients with sepsis together, we should study only those most likely to benefit from the intervention. Better characterization of patients will be facilitated using modern 'omics technology and analysis of the increasingly large quantities of clinical data available, enabling more personalized patient selection for trial inclusion. New clinical trial design and inclusion of other endpoints in addition to mortality will also aid our search for the elusive positive clinical trial and effective interventions for sepsis.

Aloin is the major anthraquinone glycoside obtained from the Aloe species and exhibits anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities. However, the renal protective effects of aloin and underlying molecular mechanism remain unclear. This study was initiated to determine whether aloin could modulate renal functional damage in a mouse model of sepsis and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. The potential of aloin treatment to reduce renal damage induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery in mice was measured by assessment of serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), lipid peroxidation, total glutathione, glutathione peroxidase activity, catalase activity, and superoxide dismutase activity. Post-treatment with aloin resulted in a significant reduction in the deleterious renal functions by CLP, such as elevated BUN, creatinine, and urine protein. Moreover, aloin inhibited nuclear factor-κB activation and reduced the induction of nitric oxide synthase and excessive production of nitric acid. Aloin treatment also reduced the plasma levels of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α, reduced lethality due to CLP-induced sepsis, increased lipid peroxidation, and markedly enhanced the antioxidant defense system by restoring the levels of superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase in kidney tissues. Our study suggested that aloin protects mice against sepsis-triggered renal injury.

Pediatric sepsis is a heterogeneous state associated with significant morbidity and mortality, but treatment strategies are limited. Clinical trials of immunomodulators in sepsis have shown no benefit, despite having a strong biological rationale. There is considerable interest in application of a precision medicine approach to pediatric sepsis to identify patients who are more likely to benefit from targeted therapeutic interventions.

Precision medicine requires a clear understanding of the molecular basis of disease. 'Omics data' and bioinformatics tools have enabled identification of endotypes of pediatric septic shock, with corresponding biological pathways. Further, using a multibiomarker-based approach, patients at highest risk of poor outcomes can be identified at disease onset. Enrichment strategies, both predictive and prognostic, may be used to optimize patient selection in clinical trials and identify a subpopulation in whom therapy of interest may be trialed. A bedside-to-bench-to-bedside model may offer clinicians pragmatic tools to aid in decision-making.

Precision medicine approaches may be used to subclassify, risk-stratify, and select pediatric patients with sepsis who may benefit from new therapies. Application of precision medicine will require robust basic and translational research, rigorous clinical trials, and infrastructure to collect and analyze big data.

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is recognized as a late mediator of sepsis, and the inhibition of HMGB1 release and recovery of vascular barrier integrity have emerged as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of sepsis. We tested the hypothesis that aloin induces sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and heme oxygenase (HO)-1, which inhibit HMGB1 release in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated cells, thereby inhibiting HMGB1-induced hyperpermeability and increasing the survival of septic mice. Aloin was administered after LPS or HMGB1 challenge, and the antiseptic activity of aloin was determined from measurements of permeability, activation of pro-inflammatory proteins and production of markers for tissue injury in HMGB1-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and a cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced sepsis mouse model. Aloin significantly reduced HMGB1 release in LPS-activated HUVECs via SIRT1-mediated HMGB1 deacetylation and the PI3K/Nrf2/heme oxygenase (HO)-1 signaling axis. Aloin also suppressed the production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α and interleukin (IL)-6, as well as the activation of nuclear factor (NF)- κ B and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) by HMGB1. Moreover, aloin restored HMGB1-mediated vascular disruption and inhibited vascular hyperpermeability in mice. In addition, treatment with aloin reduced the CLP-induced release of HMGB1, sepsis-related mortality and tissue injury in vivo. Our results suggest that aloin reduces HMGB1 release and sepsis-related mortality by activating SIRT1 and PI3K/Nrf2/HO-1 signals, indicating that aloin has potential for the treatment of sepsis.

Inhalation of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) is associated with elevated pulmonary injury attributed to the loss of vascular barrier integrity. Black ginseng (BG), steamed 9 times and dried ginseng, and its major protopanaxatriol type ginsenosides (ginsenoside Rg4, Rg6, Rh4, Rh1, and Rg2) exhibited various biological activities including anti-septic, anti-diabetic, wound healing, immune-stimulatory, and anti-antioxidant activity. The aim of this study was to investigate the beneficial effects of Rgx365 (a protopanaxatriol type rare ginsenosides fraction) on PM-induced lung endothelial cell (EC) barrier disruption and pulmonary inflammation. Permeability, leukocyte migration, activation of proinflammatory proteins, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and histology were examined in PM2.5-treated EC and mice. Rgx365 significantly scavenged PM2.5-induced ROS, inhibited ROS-induced activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), activated Akt in purified pulmonary EC, which helped maintain endothelial integrity. Further, Rgx365 reduced vascular protein leakage, leukocyte infiltration, and proinflammatory cytokine release in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids in PM-induced mouse lung tissues. Data suggested that Rgx365 might exhibit protective effects in PM-induced inflammatory lung injury and vascular hyperpermeability.

Human endothelial cells-derived polyphosphate (PolyP) is one of the pro-inflammatory mediators as suggested by the previous reports. 2,2'-bipyridine containing natural products are generally accepted to have antimicrobial, cytotoxic and anti-inflammatory properties. This study was undertaken to investigate whether a 2,2'-bipyridine containing natural product, collismycins C, can modulate PolyP-mediated inflammatory responses in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and in mice. After HUVECs or mice were activated with PolyP, cells or mice were post-treated with collismycins C. The anti-inflammatory activities of collismycins C were determined by measuring permeability, leukocytes adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in PolyP-activated HUVECs and mice. In addition, the beneficial effects of collismycins C on survival rate in PolyP-injected mice. Collismycins C inhibits PolyP-mediated barrier disruption, the expressions of cell adhesion molecules, and leukocyte to HUVEC adhesion/migration. Interestingly, PolyP-induced NF-κB activation and the productions of TNF-α and IL-6 were inhibited by collismycins C in HUVECs. These anti-inflammatory functions of collismycins C were confirmed in PolyP injected mice. In conclusion, based on the anti-inflammatory effects of collismycins C in PolyP-mediated septic response, collismycins C have therapeutic potential for various systemic inflammatory diseases.

The study aimed to detect critical metabolites in acute lung injury (ALI).

A comparative analysis of microarray profile of patients with sepsis-induced ALI compared with sepsis patients with was conducted using bioinformatic tools through constructing multi-omics network. Multi-omics composite networks (gene network, metabolite network, phenotype network, gene-metabolite association network, phenotype-gene association network, and phenotype-metabolite association network) were constructed, following by integration of these composite networks to establish a heterogeneous network. Next, seed genes, and ALI phenotype were mapped into the heterogeneous network to further obtain a weighted composite network. Random walk with restart (RWR) was used for the weighted composite network to extract and prioritize the metabolites. On the basis of the distance proximity among metabolites, the top 50 metabolites with the highest proximity were identified, and the top 100 co-expressed genes interacted with the top 50 metabolites were also screened out.

Totally, there were 9363 nodes and 10,226,148 edges in the integrated composite network. There were 4 metabolites with the scores > 0.009, including CHITIN, Tretinoin, sodium ion, and Celebrex. Adenosine 5'-diphosphate, triphosadenine, and tretinoin had higher degrees in the composite network and the co-expressed network.

Adenosine 5'-diphosphate, triphosadenine, and tretinoin may be potential biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment of ALI.

In the present study, several decursin analogues (KC1-3) were synthesized and evaluated in terms of their anti-septic activities on high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1)-mediated septic responses and survival rate in a mouse model of sepsis. KC1 and KC3, but not KC2, significantly reduced HMGB1 release in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and attenuated the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced release of HMGB1. Additionally, in vitro analyses revealed that KC1 and KC3 both alleviated HMGB1-mediated vascular disruptions and inhibited hyperpermeability in mice, and in vivo analyses revealed that KC1 and KC3 reduced sepsis-related mortality and tissue injury. Taken together, the present results suggest that KC1 and KC3 both reduced HMGB1 release and septic mortality and, thus, may be useful for the treatment of sepsis.

Pelargonidin (PEL) is a well-known red pigment found in plants, and has been reported as having important biological activities that are potentially beneficial for human health. Here, we tested the possible use of PEL in the treatment of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated vascular inflammatory responses. The anti-inflammatory activities of PEL were determined by measuring permeability, neutrophils adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in LPS-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. We found that PEL inhibited LPS-induced barrier disruption, expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), and adhesion/transendothelial migration of neutrophils to human endothelial cells. PEL also suppressed LPS-induced hyperpermeability and leukocytes migration in vivo. Furthermore, PEL suppressed the production of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) or Interleukin (IL)-6 and the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) or extracellular regulated kinases (ERK) 1/2 by LPS. Moreover, treatment with PEL resulted in reduced LPS-induced lethal endotoxemia. These results suggest that PEL possesses anti-inflammatory functions by inhibiting hyperpermeability, expression of CAMs, and adhesion and migration of leukocytes, thereby endorsing its usefulness as a therapy for vascular inflammatory diseases.

Sepsis, defined as infection plus some degree of organ dysfunction, is still associated with high mortality and morbidity rates. Management focuses on three key areas: infection control, hemodynamic stabilization and organ support, and modulation of the sepsis response. Areas covered: This review will not cover infection control. Hemodynamic stabilization essentially involves the use of adequate fluid resuscitation and vasopressors. Fluid and vasopressor choices and targets are discussed, and the need to adapt these to the individual patient is stressed. No drugs are currently available that modulate the sepsis response, with the possible exception of corticosteroids in the most severe cases. The place of vasopressin is not well defined. Some of the immunomodulatory agents currently in development are briefly discussed. Expert opinion: Management of the patient with sepsis remains a challenge and needs to be personalized. The search for new immunomodulatory drugs continues and will be facilitated by better characterization of patients using modern 'omics' technology and complex analysis of the large quantities of clinical data increasingly available.

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is considered as a late mediator of sepsis and the inhibition of HMGB1-mediated severe inflammatory responses, and restoration of endothelial integrity have emerged as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of sepsis. Ginsenoside Rh1, a protopanaxatriol type ginsenoside, is one of the major bioactive components of Korean red ginseng, which has been increasingly used for enhancing cognition and physical health worldwide. Ginsenoside Rh1 exhibits potent biological activities such as antistress, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects. We examined the effects of ginsenoside Rh1 on HMGB1-mediated septic responses and survival rate in a mouse model of sepsis. Ginsenoside-Rh1 was administered after the HMGB1 challenge. The antiseptic activity of ginsenoside Rh1 was determined by measuring the permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in HMGB1-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice, and the survival rate in a sepsis mouse model. Ginsenoside Rh1 significantly reduced HMGB1 release in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated HUVECs. Furthermore, ginsenoside Rh1 suppressed the production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α , interleukin (IL)-6, activation of nuclear factor (NF)- κ B and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 by HMGB1. Ginsenoside Rh1 also inhibited HMGB1-mediated hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, treatment with ginsenoside Rh1 reduced the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced release of HMGB1, sepsis-related mortality and tissue injury in vivo. Our results indicated that ginsenoside Rh1 might be useful in the treatment of sepsis by targeting HMGB1.

Intensive care unit-acquired weakness (ICU-AW) is often observed in critically ill patients with prolonged intensive care unit (ICU) stay. We hypothesized that evolving metabolic abnormalities during prolonged ICU stay are reflected by changing nutrient patterns in blood, urine and skeletal muscle, and that these patterns differ in patients with/without ICU-AW and between patients with/without sepsis.

In a prospective single-center observational trial, we aim to recruit 100 critically ill patients (ICU length of stay ≥ 5 days) with severe sepsis/septic shock ("sepsis group", n = 50) or severe head trauma/intracerebral hemorrhage ("CNS group", n = 50). Patients will be sub-grouped for presence or absence of ICU-AW as determined by the Medical Research Council sum score. Blood and urine samples will be collected and subjected to comprehensive nutrient analysis at different time points by targeted quantitative mass spectrometric methods. In addition, changes in muscular tissue (biopsy, when available), muscular architecture (ultrasound), electrophysiology, body composition analyses (bioimpedance, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging), along with clinical status will be assessed. Patients will be followed-up for 180 and 360 days including assessment of quality of life.

Key objective of this trial is to assess changes in nutrient pattern in blood and urine over time in critically ill patients with/without ICU-AW by using quantitative nutrient analysis techniques. Peer-reviewed published NAChO data will allow for a better understanding of metabolic changes in critically ill patients on standard liquid enteral nutrition and will likely open up new avenues for future therapeutic and nutritional interventions.

A large proportion of ongoing malaria parasite transmission is attributed to low-density subclinical infections not readily detected by available rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) or microscopy. Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte carriage is subclinical, but gametocytemic individuals comprise the parasite reservoir that leads to infection of mosquitoes and local transmission. Effective detection and quantification of these carriers can help advance malaria elimination strategies. However, no point-of-need (PON) RDTs for gametocyte detection exist, much less one that can perform noninvasive sampling of saliva outside a clinical setting. Here, we report on the discovery of 35 parasite markers from which we selected a single candidate for use in a PON RDT. We performed a cross-sectional, multi-omics study of saliva from 364 children with subclinical infection in Cameroon and Zambia and produced a prototype saliva-based PON lateral flow immunoassay test for P. falciparum gametocyte carriers. The test is capable of identifying submicroscopic carriage in both clinical and nonclinical settings and is compatible with archived saliva samples.

In the last decade, the sepsis research field has shifted focus from targeting hyperinflammation to reversing sepsis-induced immunoparalysis. Sepsis-induced immunoparalysis is very heterogeneous: the magnitude and the nature of the underlying immune defects differ considerably between patients, but also within individuals over time. Therefore, a 'one-treatment-fits-all' strategy for sepsis-induced immunoparalysis is bound to fail, and an individualized 'precision medicine' approach is required. Such a strategy is nevertheless hampered by the unsuitability of the currently available markers to identify the many immune defects that can manifest in individual patients. Areas covered: We describe the currently available markers for sepsis-induced immunoparalysis and limitations pertaining to their use. Furthermore, future prospects and caveats are discussed, focusing on 'omics' approaches: genomics, transcriptomics, epigenomics, and metabolomics. Finally, we present a contemporary overview of adjuvant immunostimulatory therapies. Expert opinion: The integration of multiple omics techniques offers a systems biology approach which can yield biomarker profiles that accurately and comprehensively gauge the extent and nature of sepsis-induced immunoparalysis. We expect this development to be instrumental in facilitating precision medicine for sepsis-induced immunoparalysis, consisting of the application of targeted immunostimulatory therapies and follow-up measurements to monitor the response to treatment and to titrate or adjust medication.

Epidemiological studies regarding many successful vaccines suggest that vaccination may lead to a reduction in child mortality and morbidity worldwide, on a grander scale than is attributable to protection against the specific target diseases of these vaccines. These non-specific effects (NSEs) of the Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, for instance, implicate adaptive and innate immune mechanisms, with recent evidence suggesting that trained immunity might be a key instrument at play. Collectively referring to the memory-like characteristics of innate immune cells, trained immunity stems from epigenetic reprogramming that these innate immune cells undergo following exposure to a primary stimulus like BCG. The epigenetic changes subsequently regulate cytokine production and cell metabolism and in turn, epigenetic changes are regulated by these effects. Novel -omics technologies, combined with in vitro models for trained immunity and other immunological techniques, identify the biological pathways within innate cells that enable training by BCG. Future research should aim to identify biomarkers for vaccine heterologous effects, such that they can be applied to epidemiological studies. Linking biological mechanisms to the reduction in all-cause mortality observed in epidemiological studies will strengthen the evidence in favor of vaccine NSEs. The universal acceptance of these NSEs would demand a re-evaluation of current vaccination policies, such as the childhood vaccination recommendations by the World Health Organization, in order to produce the maximum impact on childhood mortality.

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is considered to be a late mediator of sepsis. The inhibition of HMGB1-mediated severe inflammatory response and restoration of endothelial integrity have emerged as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of sepsis. Rare ginsenosides, Rk1 (SB1) and Rg5 (SB2), are among the main components of black ginseng and are prepared from ginsenoside Rd by steaming at 120 °C for 3 h. We examined the effects of SB1 and SB2 on HMGB1-mediated septic response and survival rate in a mouse model of sepsis. SB1 and SB2 were administered after challenge with HMGB1. SB1 and SB2 significantly reduced the release of HMGB1 in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECS) via the SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of HMGB1. Moreover, SB1 and SB2 suppressed the production of TNF-α and IL-6 and the activation of NF-κB and ERK 1/2 by HMGB1. SB1 and SB2 also inhibited HMGB1-mediated hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, treatment with SB1 and SB2 reduced the cecal ligation and puncture-induced release of HMGB1, sepsis-related mortality, and tissue injury in vivo. Our results indicate that SB1 and SB2 might be useful in the treatment of sepsis by targeting HMGB1.

Circulatory shock is a life-threatening disease that accounts for around one-third of all admissions to intensive care units (ICU). It requires immediate treatment, which is why the development of tools for planning therapeutic interventions is required to deal with shock in the critical care environment. In this study, the ShockOmics European project original database is used to extract attributes capable of predicting mortality due to shock in the ICU. Missing data imputation techniques and machine learning models were used, followed by feature selection from different data subsets. Selected features were later used to build Bayesian Networks, revealing causal relationships between features and ICU outcome. The main result is a subset of predictive features that includes well-known indicators such as the SOFA and APACHE II scores, but also less commonly considered ones related to cardiovascular function assessed through echocardiograpy or shock treatment with pressors. Importantly, certain selected features are shown to be most predictive at certain time-steps. This means that, as shock progresses, different attributes could be prioritized. Clinical traits obtained at 24h. from ICU admission are shown to accurately predict cardiogenic and septic shock mortality, suggesting that relevant life-saving decisions could be made shortly after ICU admission.

Inhibition of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) and restoration of endothelial integrity are emerging as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of severe vascular inflammatory diseases. Recently, we found that JH-4, a synthesized decursin derivative, exhibited a strong anti-Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome by efficiently blocking progerin-lamin A/C binding. In this study, we examined the effects of JH-4 on HMGB1-mediated septic responses and the survival rate in a mouse sepsis model. The anti-inflammatory activities of JH-4 were monitored based on its effects on lipopolysaccharide- or cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-mediated release of HMGB1. The antiseptic activities of JH-4 were determined by measuring permeability, leukocyte adhesion, migration, and the activation of proinflammatory proteins in HMGB1-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells and mice. JH-4 inhibited the release of HMGB1 and downregulated HMGB1-dependent inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells. JH-4 also inhibited HMGB1-mediated hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, treatment with JH-4 reduced CLP-induced release of HMGB1, sepsis-related mortality, and pulmonary injury in vivo. Our results indicate that JH-4 is a possible therapeutic agent to treat various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via the inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Aspalathin (Aspt) and nothofagin (Not) were reported to have antioxidant activity and are the two major active dihydrochalcones in green rooibos. This study was conducted to determine whether Asp and Not can modulate renal functional damage in a mouse model of sepsis and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

The potential of Aspt and Not treatment to reduce renal damage induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery in mice was measured by assessing blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine, total urine protein, levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), nitric oxide (NO), tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6, and myeloperoxidase (MPO), lipid peroxidation, total glutathione, glutathione peroxidase activity, catalase activity, and superoxide dismutase activity.

Treatment with Aspt and Not decreased plasma levels of BUN, creatinine, urine protein, and LDH in mice with CLP-induced renal damage. Moreover, Aspt and Not inhibited nuclear factor (NF)-κB activation and reduced the induction of NO synthase and excessive production of nitric acid. Aspt and Not treatment also reduced the plasma levels of NO, TNF-α, IL-6, and MPO and reduced lethality due to CLP-induced sepsis, increased lipid peroxidation, and markedly enhanced the antioxidant defence system by restoring the levels of superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase in the kidney tissues.

Our results suggest that Aspt and Not protect mice against sepsis-triggered renal injury.

Antibiotics (AB) can reduce morbidity and mortality in the treatment of patients with sepsis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations. Yet, AB overuse or misuse increases antibiotic resistance (ABR) and Clostridium difficile infections (CDI). This study projected the expected impact of a procalcitonin (PCT) biomarker testing strategy on incremental ABR cases and CDI, and costs of care in a population of patients hospitalized with suspected sepsis or a COPD exacerbation, in three European countries: the United Kingdom, Germany, and the Netherlands. Based on a systematic literature search and a decision model, we analyzed the number of ABR and CDI cases avoided and the incremental healthcare costs per patient from a societal perspective over the time horizon of a hospital stay. In the sepsis population, the PCT-guided antibiotic prescription strategy was projected to reduce the number of ABR cases with circa 6%, the number of CDI cases with 21%, and societal costs with circa €1300 per patient. In the COPD population, the number of ABR and CDI cases is reduced with circa 50%, and societal cost savings ranged €1701, €2473, and €2435 per patient in Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, respectively. Model outcomes were most sensitive to the impact of the PCT-guided strategy on the number of intensive care unit days and general hospital ward days. Taken together, a PCT biomarker-guided antibiotic management strategy is likely to reduce the number of ABR and CDI cases and generate cost savings in a population of patients hospitalized with suspected sepsis or with a COPD exacerbation.

Sepsis has over the years proven a considerable challenge to physicians and researchers. Numerous pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions have been tested in trials, but have unfortunately failed to improve the general prognosis. This has led to the speculation that the sepsis population may be too heterogeneous to be targeted with the traditional one treatment suits all' approach. Recent advances in genetic and biochemical analyses now allow genotyping and biochemical characterisation of large groups of patients via the 'omics' technologies. These new opportunities could lead to a paradigm shift in the approach to sepsis towards personalised treatments with interventions targeted towards specific pathophysiological mechanisms activated in the patient. In this article, we review the potentials and pitfalls of using new advanced technologies to deepen our understanding of the clinical syndrome of sepsis.

Pelargonidin (PEL) is a well-known red pigment found in plants, and it has been reported to have important biological activities that are potentially beneficial for human health. This study was initiated to determine whether PEL could modulate renal functional damage in a mouse model of sepsis, and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. The potential of PEL treatment to reduce renal damage induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery in mice was measured by assessment of serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), lipid peroxidation, total glutathione, glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) activity, catalase activity, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity. Treatment with PEL resulted in elevated plasma levels of BUN and creatinine, and of protein in urine in mice with CLP-induced renal damage. Moreover, PEL inhibited nuclear factor-κB activation and reduced the induction of nitric oxide synthase and excessive production of nitric acid. PEL treatment also reduced the plasma levels of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α reduced lethality due to CLP-induced sepsis, increased lipid peroxidation, and markedly enhanced the antioxidant defense system by restoring the levels of SOD, GSH-Px, and catalase in kidney tissues. These results suggested that PEL protects mice against sepsis-triggered renal injury.

Zingerone (ZGR), a phenolic alkanone isolated from ginger, has been reported to possess pharmacological activities such as anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic effects. This study was initiated to determine whether ZGR could modulate renal functional damage in a mouse model of sepsis and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. The potential of ZGR treatment to reduce renal damage induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery in mice was measured by assessment of serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), lipid peroxidation, total glutathione, glutathione peroxidase activity, catalase activity, and superoxide dismutase activity. Treatment with ZGR resulted in elevated plasma levels of BUN and creatinine, and of protein in urine in mice with CLP-induced renal damage. Moreover, ZGR inhibited nuclear factor-κB activation and reduced the induction of nitric oxide synthase and excessive production of nitric acid. ZGR treatment also reduced the plasma levels of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α, reduced lethality due to CLP-induced sepsis, increased lipid peroxidation, and markedly enhanced the antioxidant defense system by restoring the levels of superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase in kidney tissues. Our study showed renal suppressive effects of zingerone in a mouse model of sepsis, suggesting that ZGR protects mice against sepsis-triggered renal injury. [BMB Reports 2019; 52(4): 271-276].

Neonatal sepsis remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality especially in the preterm infant population. The ability to promptly and accurately diagnose neonatal sepsis based on clinical evaluation and laboratory blood tests remains challenging. Advances in high-throughput molecular technologies have increased investigations into the utility of transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic approaches as diagnostic tools for neonatal sepsis. A systems-level understanding of neonatal sepsis, obtained by using omics-based technologies (at the transcriptome, proteome or metabolome level), may lead to new diagnostic tools for neonatal sepsis. In particular, recent omic-based studies have identified distinct transcriptional signatures and metabolic or proteomic biomarkers associated with sepsis. Despite the emerging need for a systems biology approach, future studies have to address the challenges of integrating multi-omic data with laboratory and clinical meta-data in order to translate outcomes into precision medicine for neonatal sepsis. Omics-based analytical approaches may advance diagnostic tools for neonatal sepsis. More research is needed to validate the recent systems biology findings in order to integrate multi-dimensional data (clinical, laboratory and multi-omic) for future translation into precision medicine for neonatal sepsis. This review will discuss the possible applications of omics-based analyses for identification of new biomarkers and diagnostic signatures for neonatal sepsis, focusing on the immune-compromised preterm infant and considerations for clinical translation.

The emergence and spread of antibiotic resistant micro-organisms is a global concern, which is largely attributable to inaccurate prescribing of antibiotics to patients presenting with non-bacterial infections. The use of 'omics' technologies for discovery of novel infection related biomarkers combined with novel treatment algorithms offers possibilities for rapidly distinguishing between bacterial and viral infections. This distinction can be particularly important for patients suffering from lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) and/or sepsis as they represent a significant burden to healthcare systems. Here we present the study details of the TAILORED-Treatment study, an observational, prospective, multi-centre study aiming to generate a multi-parametric model, combining host and pathogen data, for distinguishing between bacterial and viral aetiologies in children and adults with LRTI and/or sepsis.

A total number of 1200 paediatric and adult patients aged 1 month and older with LRTI and/or sepsis or a non-infectious disease are recruited from Emergency Departments and hospital wards of seven Dutch and Israeli medical centres. A panel of three experienced physicians adjudicate a reference standard diagnosis for all patients (i.e., bacterial or viral infection) using all available clinical and laboratory information, including a 28-day follow-up assessment. Nasal swabs and blood samples are collected for multi-omics investigations including host RNA and protein biomarkers, nasal microbiota profiling, host genomic profiling and bacterial proteomics. Simplified data is entered into a custom-built database in order to develop a multi-parametric model and diagnostic tools for differentiating between bacterial and viral infections. The predictions from the model will be compared with the consensus diagnosis in order to determine its accuracy.

The TAILORED-Treatment study will provide new insights into the interplay between the host and micro-organisms. New host- or pathogen-related biomarkers will be used to generate a multi-parametric model for distinguishing between bacterial and viral infections. This model will be helpful to better guide antimicrobial therapy for patients with LRTI and sepsis. This study has the potential to improve patient care, reduce unnecessary antibiotic prescribing and will contribute positively to institutional, national and international healthcare economics.

NCT02025699 . Registration Date: January, 1, 2014.

We analyzed the blood transcriptome of sepsis framed within community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and characterized its molecular and cellular heterogeneity in terms of functional modules of co-regulated genes with impact for the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Our results showed that CAP severity is associated with immune suppression owing to T-cell exhaustion and HLA and chemokine receptor deactivation, endotoxin tolerance, macrophage polarization, and metabolic conversion from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis. We also found footprints of host's response to viruses and bacteria, altered levels of mRNA from erythrocytes and platelets indicating coagulopathy that parallel severity of sepsis and survival. Finally, our data demonstrated chromatin re-modeling associated with extensive transcriptional deregulation of chromatin modifying enzymes, which suggests the extensive changes of DNA methylation with potential impact for marker selection and functional characterization. Based on the molecular footprints identified, we propose a novel stratification of CAP cases into six groups differing in the transcriptomic scores of CAP severity, interferon response, and erythrocyte mRNA expression with impact for prognosis. Our analysis increases the resolution of transcriptomic footprints of CAP and reveals opportunities for selecting sets of transcriptomic markers with impact for translation of omics research in terms of patient stratification schemes and sets of signature genes.

Recent technological advances have provided deeper insights into the role of small molecules in biological processes. Metabolic profiling has thus entered the arena of -omics studies and rapidly proven its value both as stand-alone and as complement to other more advanced approaches, notably transcriptomics. Here we describe the potential of metabolic profiling for vaccinology embedded in the context of infection and immunity. This discussion is preceded by a description of the relevant technical and analytical tools for biological interpretation of metabolic data. Although not as widely applied as other -omics technologies, we believe that metabolic profiling can make important contributions to the better understanding of mechanisms underlying vaccine-induced responses and their effects on the prevention of infection or disease.

A century of advances in infectious disease diagnosis and treatment changed the face of medicine. However, challenges continue to develop including multi-drug resistance, globalization that increases pandemic risks, and high mortality from severe infections. These challenges can be mitigated through improved diagnostics, and over the past decade, there has been a particular focus on the host response. Since this article was originally published in 2015, there have been significant developments in the field of host response diagnostics, warranting this updated review. Areas Covered: This review begins by discussing developments in single biomarkers and pauci-analyte biomarker panels. It then delves into 'omics, an area where there has been truly exciting progress. Specifically, progress has been made in sepsis diagnosis and prognosis; differentiating viral, bacterial, and fungal pathogen classes; pre-symptomatic diagnosis; and understanding disease-specific diagnostic challenges in tuberculosis, Lyme disease, and Ebola. Expert Commentary: As 'omics have become faster, more precise, and less expensive, the door has been opened for academic, industry, and government efforts to develop host-based infectious disease classifiers. While there are still obstacles to overcome, the chasm separating these scientific advances from the patient's bedside is shrinking.

The incidence and prevalence of sepsis depend on the definitions and records that we use and we may be underestimating their impact. Up to 60% of the cases come from the community and in 30-60% we obtain microbiological information. Sometimes its presentation is ambiguous and there may be a delay in its detection, especially in the fragile population. Procalcitonin is the most validated biomarker for bacterial sepsis and the one that best discriminates the non-infectious cause. Presepsin and pro-adrenomedullin are useful for early diagnosis, risk stratification and prognosis in septic patients. The combination of biomarkers is even more useful to clarify an infectious cause than any isolated biomarker. Resuscitation with artificial colloids has worse results than crystalloids, especially in patients with renal insufficiency. The combination of saline solution and balanced crystalloids is associated with a better prognosis. Albumin is only recommended in patients who require a large volume of fluids. The modern molecular methods on the direct sample or the identification by MALDI-TOF on positive blood culture have helped to shorten the response times in diagnosis, to optimize the antibiotic treatment and to facilitate stewardship programs. The hemodynamic response in neonates and children is different from that in adults. In neonatal sepsis, persistent pulmonary hypertension leads to an increase in right ventricular afterload and heart failure with hepatomegaly. Hypotension, poor cardiac output with elevated systemic vascular resistance (cold shock) is often a terminal sign in septic shock. Developing ultra-fast Point-of-Care tests (less than 30 minutes), implementing technologies based on omics, big data or massive sequencing or restoring "healthy" microbiomes in critical patients after treatment are the main focuses of research in sepsis. The main benefits of establishing a sepsis code are to decrease the time to achieve diagnosis and treatment, improve organization, unify criteria, promote teamwork to achieve common goals, increase participation, motivation and satisfaction among team members, and reduce costs.

La incidencia y la prevalencia de la sepsis dependen de las definiciones y de los registros que empleamos y podemos estar infravalorando su impacto. Hasta el 60% de los casos proceden de la comunidad y en un 30-60% obtenemos información microbiológica. Su forma de presentación es en ocasiones ambigua y puede haber retraso en su detección, sobre todo en población frágil. La procalcitonina es el biomarcador más validado para la sepsis bacteriana y el que discrimina mejor la causa no infecciosa. La presepsina y la pro-adrenomedulina son útiles para el diagnóstico precoz, la estratificación de riesgo y el pronóstico en pacientes sépticos. La combinación de biomarcadores es aun más útil para esclarecer una causa infecciosa que cualquier biomarcador aislado. La reanimación con coloides artificiales tiene peores resultados que los cristaloides, especialmente en pacientes con insuficiencia renal. La combinación de solución salina y cristaloides equilibrados se asocia con un mejor pronóstico. la albúmina solo se recomienda en aquellos pacientes que requieren un gran volumen de líquidos. Los modernos métodos moleculares sobre la muestra directa o la identificación por MALDI-TOF sobre hemocultivo positivo han ayudado a acortar los tiempos de respuesta en diagnóstico, a optimizar el tratamiento antibiótico y a facilitar los programas de optimización. La respuesta hemodinámica en neonatos y niños es diferente a la de los adultos. En la sepsis neonatal, la hipertensión pulmonar persistente conduce a un aumento de la postcarga del ventrículo derecho y la insuficiencia cardíaca con hepatomegalia. La hipotensión, el gasto cardíaco deficiente con elevadas resistencias vasculares sistémicas (shock frío) son a menudo un signo terminal en el shock séptico. Desarrollar pruebas Point-of-Care ultrarrápidas (menos de 30 minutos), implementar tecnologías basadas en ómicas, big data o secuenciación masiva o restaurar microbiomas “saludables” en pacientes críticos tras el tratamiento son los principales focos de investigación en sepsis. Los principales beneficios de establecer un código de sepsis son disminuir el tiempo para lograr el diagnóstico y tratamiento, mejorar la organización, unificar criterios, promover el trabajo en equipo para lograr objetivos comunes, aumentar la participación, motivación y satisfacción entre los miembros del equipo y reducir costes.

The history of osteoarthritis (OA) is important because it can help broaden our perspective on past and present controversies. The naming of OA, beginning with Heberden's nodes, is itself a fascinating story. According to Albert Hoffa, R. Llewellyn Jones and Archibald Edward Garrod, the name OA was introduced in the mid-nineteenth century by surgeon Richard von Volkmann who distinguished it from rheumatoid arthritis and gout. Others preferred the terms 'chronical rheumatism', 'senile arthritis', 'hypertrophic arthritis' or 'arthritis deformans'. A similar narrative applies to the concept of OA affecting the whole joint vs the 'wear-and-tear' hypothesis, inflammation and the role of the central nervous system (CNS). In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the Garrods (father and son) and Hermann Senator argued that OA was a whole joint disease, and that inflammation played a major role in its progression. Garrod Jnr and John Spender also linked OA to a neurogenic lesion 'outside the joint'. The remaining twentieth century was no less dynamic, with major advances in basic science, diagnostics, treatments, surgical interventions and technologies. Today, OA is characterized as a multi-disease with inflammation, immune and CNS dysfunction playing central roles in whole joint damage, injury progression, pain and disability. In the current 'omics' era (genomics, proteomics and metabolomics), we owe a great debt to past physicians and surgeons who dared to think 'outside-the-box' to explain and treat OA. Over 130 years later, despite these developments, we still don't fully understand the underlying complexities of OA, and we still don't have a cure.

Cancer chemotherapy-associated febrile neutropenia (FN) is a common condition that is deadly when bacteremia is present. Detection of bacteremia depends on culture, which takes days, and no accurate predictive tools applicable to the initial evaluation are available. We utilized metabolomics and transcriptomics to develop multivariable predictors of bacteremia among FN patients.

We classified emergency department patients with FN and no apparent infection at presentation as bacteremic (cases) or not (controls), according to blood culture results. We assessed relative metabolite abundance in plasma, and relative expression of 2,560 immunology and cancer-related genes in whole blood. We used logistic regression to identify multivariable predictors of bacteremia, and report test characteristics of the derived predictors.

For metabolomics, 14 bacteremic cases and 25 non-bacteremic controls were available for analysis; for transcriptomics we had 7 and 22 respectively. A 5-predictor metabolomic model had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.991 (95%CI: 0.972,1.000), 100% sensitivity, and 96% specificity for identifying bacteremia. Pregnenolone steroids were more abundant in cases and carnitine metabolites were more abundant in controls. A 3-predictor gene expression model had corresponding results of 0.961 (95%CI: 0.896,1.000), 100%, and 86%. Genes involved in innate immunity were differentially expressed.

Classifiers derived from metabolomic and gene expression data hold promise as objective and accurate predictors of bacteremia among FN patients without apparent infection at presentation, and can provide insights into the underlying biology. Our findings should be considered illustrative, but may lay the groundwork for future biomarker development.

Only a few isoflavones have been isolated from plants of the genus Abronia. The biological properties of compounds isolated from Abronia species have not been well established, and their antisepsis effects have not been reported yet. In the present study, a new C-methylcoumarinochromone, was isolated from Abronia nana suspension cultures. Its structure was deduced as 9,11-dihydroxy-10-methylcoumarinochromone (boeravinone Y, 1) by spectroscopic data analysis and verified by chemical synthesis. The potential inhibitory effects of 1 against high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1)-mediated septic responses were investigated. Results showed that 1 effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced release of HMGB1 and suppressed HMGB1-mediated septic responses, in terms of reduction of hyperpermeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and cell adhesion molecule expression. In addition, 1 increased the phagocytic activity of macrophages and exhibited bacterial clearance effects in the peritoneal fluid and blood of mice with cecal ligation and puncture-induced sepsis. Collectively, these results suggested that 1 might have potential therapeutic activity against various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

"-Omics" systems sciences are at the epicenter of personalized medicine and public health, and drivers of knowledge-based biotechnology innovation. Bioinformatics, a core component of omics research, is one of the disciplines that first employed Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS), and thus provided a fertile ground for its further development. Understanding the use and characteristics of FLOSS deployed in the omics field is valuable for future innovation strategies, policy and funding priorities. We conducted a bibliometric, longitudinal study of the use of FLOSS in sepsis omics research from 2011 to 2015 in the United States, EU-28 and China. Because sepsis is an interdisciplinary field at the intersection of multiple omics technologies and medical specialties, it was chosen as a model innovation ecosystem for this empirical analysis, which used publicly available data. Despite development of and competition from proprietary commercial software, scholars in omics continue to employ FLOSS routinely, and independent of the type of omics technology they work with. The number of articles using FLOSS increased significantly over time in the EU-28, as opposed to the United States and China (R = 0.96, p = 0.004). Furthermore, in an era where sharing of knowledge is being strongly advocated and promoted by public agencies and social institutions, we discuss possible correlations between the use of FLOSS and various funding sources in omics research. These observations and analyses provide new insights into the use of FLOSS in sepsis omics research across three (supra)national regions. Further benchmarking studies are warranted for FLOSS trends in other omics fields and geographical settings. These could, in time, lead to the development of new composite innovation and technology use metrics in omics systems sciences and bioinformatics communities.

Sepsis is a multifactorial clinical syndrome with an extremely dynamic clinical course and with high diverse clinical phenotype. Early diagnosis is crucial for the final clinical outcome. Previous studies have not identified a biomarker for the diagnosis of sepsis which would have sufficient sensitivity and specificity. Identification of the infectious agents or the use of molecular biology, next gene sequencing, has not brought significant benefit for the patient in terms of early diagnosis. Therefore, we are currently searching for biomarkers, through "omics" technologies with sufficient diagnostic specificity and sensitivity, able to predict the clinical course of the disease and the patient response to therapy. Current progress in the use of systems biology technologies brings us hope that by using big data from clinical trials such biomarkers will be found.

"-Omics" research is in transition with the recent rise of multi-omics technology platforms. Integration of "-omics" and multi-omics research is of high priority in sepsis, a heterogeneous syndrome that is widely recognized as a global health burden and a priority biomedical funding field. We report here an original study on bibliometric trends in the use of "-omics" technologies, and multi-omics approaches in particular, in sepsis research in three (supra)national settings, the United States, the European Union 28 Member States (EU-28), and China. Using a 5-year longitudinal bibliometric study design from 2011 to 2015, we analyzed the sepsis-related research articles in English language that included at least one or multi-omics technologies in publicly available form in Medline (free full texts). We found that the United States has had the lead (almost one-third of publications) in the inclusion of an "-omics" or multi-omics technology in sepsis within the study period. However, both China and the EU-28 displayed a significant increase in the number of publications that employed one or more types of "-omics" research (p < 0.005), while the EU-28 displayed a significant increase especially in multi-omics research articles in sepsis (p < 0.05). Notably, more than half of the multi-omics research studies in the sepsis knowledge domain had a university or government/state funding source. Among the multi-omics research publications in sepsis, the combination of genomics and transcriptomics was the most frequent (40.5%), followed by genomics and proteomics (20.4%). We suggest that the lead of the United States in the field of "-omics" and multi-omics research in sepsis is likely at stake, with both the EU-28 and China rapidly increasing their research capacity. Moreover, "triple omics" that combine genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics analyses appear to be uncommon in sepsis, and yet much needed for triangulation of systems science data. These observations have implications for "-omics" technology policy and global research funding strategic foresight.

The inflammatory response mediated by nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) signaling is essential for host defense against pathogens. Although the regulatory mechanism of NF-κB signaling has been well studied, the molecular basis for epigenetic regulation of the inflammatory response is poorly understood. Here we identify a new signaling axis of PKCα-LSD1-NF-κB, which is critical for activation and amplification of the inflammatory response. In response to excessive inflammatory stimuli, PKCα translocates to the nucleus and phosphorylates LSD1. LSD1 phosphorylation is required for p65 binding and facilitates p65 demethylation, leading to enhanced stability. In vivo genetic analysis using Lsd1SA/SA mice with ablation of LSD1 phosphorylation and chemical approaches in wild-type mice with inhibition of PKCα or LSD1 activity show attenuated sepsis-induced inflammatory lung injury and mortality. Together, we demonstrate that the PKCα-LSD1-NF-κB signaling cascade is crucial for epigenetic control of the inflammatory response, and targeting this signaling could be a powerful therapeutic strategy for systemic inflammatory diseases, including sepsis.

Sepsis, with its often devastating consequences for patients and their families, remains a major public health concern that poses an increasing financial burden. Early resuscitation together with the elucidation of the biological pathways and pathophysiological mechanisms with the use of "-omics" technologies have started changing the clinical and research landscape in sepsis. Metabolomics (i.e., the study of the metabolome), an "-omics" technology further down in the "-omics" cascade between the genome and the phenome, could be particularly fruitful in sepsis research with the potential to alter the clinical practice. Apart from its benefit for the individual patient, metabolomics has an impact on public health that extends beyond its applications in medicine. In this review, we present recent developments in metabolomics research in sepsis, with a focus on pneumonia, and we discuss the impact of metabolomics on public health, with a focus on free/libre open source software.

The development of new sepsis-specific biomarkers is mandatory to improve the detection and monitoring of the disease. Testican-1 is a highly conserved, multidomain proteoglycan that is most prominently expressed in the thalamus of the brain, and is upregulated in activated astroglial cells of the cerebrum. The aim of this study was to evaluate blood levels of Testican-1 in septic patients. A prospective study of 82 patients with sepsis was conducted. Furthermore, C57BL/6 mice were administrated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein or subjected to cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery. Alternatively, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) or C57BL/6 mice were exposed to LPS (100 ng/mL) or HMGB1 (1 μg/mL). LPS, HMGB1, or CLP enhanced the synthesis and secretion of Testican-1 in HUVECs and mice. In patients admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with sepsis, circulating levels of Testican-1 were significantly high (sepsis, 20.44-63.37 ng/mL, n = 30; severe sepsis, 41.30-98.69 ng/mL, n = 22; septic shock, 98.10-151.85 ng/mL, n = 30) when compared to the levels of control donors (6.97-8.77 ng/mL, n = 21), reflecting the severity of the disease. These results suggest that in septic patients, Testican-1 blood level is related to the severity of sepsis and Testican-1 could be used as a biomarker to determine the severity of sepsis.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a severe and frequent condition in hospitalized patients. Currently, no efficient therapy of AKI is available. Therefore, efforts focus on early prevention and potentially early initiation of renal replacement therapy to improve the outcome in AKI. The detection of AKI in hospitalized patients implies the need for early, accurate, robust, and easily accessible biomarkers of AKI evolution and outcome prediction because only a narrow window exists to implement the earlier-described measures. Even more challenging is the multifactorial origin of AKI and the fact that the changes of molecular expression induced by AKI are difficult to distinguish from those of the diseases associated or causing AKI as shock or sepsis. During the past decade, a considerable number of protein biomarkers for AKI have been described and we expect from recent advances in the field of omics technologies that this number will increase further in the future and be extended to other sorts of biomolecules, such as RNAs, lipids, and metabolites. However, most of these biomarkers are poorly defined by their AKI-associated molecular context. In this review, we describe the state-of-the-art tissue and biofluid proteomic and metabolomic technologies and new bioinformatics approaches for proteomic and metabolomic pathway and molecular interaction analysis. In the second part of the review, we focus on AKI-associated proteomic and metabolomic biomarkers and briefly outline their pathophysiological context in AKI.

Cudratricusxanthone A (CTXA), a natural bioactive compound extracted from the roots of Cudraniatricuspidata Bureau, is known to possess antithrombotic, antiproliferative, and antiinflammatory activities. It remains unclear that CTXA can improve hepatoprotective activity in vivo. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of CTXA on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced liver failure in mice, and to elucidate its underlying molecular mechanisms. Liver failure was induced by LPS (15 mg/kg, i.p.) in mice, and 12 hr later, they were treated intravenously with CTXA. Administration of LPS significantly increased mortality, serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), and serum inflammatory cytokines. CTXA treatment effectively countered these effects of LPS. Further, LPS treatment markedly increased the expression of myeloperoxidase, phosphorylation of p38, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and expressions of nuclear proteins, such as nuclear factor (NF)-κB and phosphorylated c-Jun. Additionally, LPS increased the serum levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6. All these effects of LPS were attenuated by CTXA. Moreover, CTXA increased the expression of sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) and reduced the expression of acetylated forkhead box O1 box O1 (Ac-FoxO1), acetylated Ac-p53, and acetylated nuclear factor-kappa beta (Ac-NF-κB). In conclusion, CTXA alleviates LPS-induced liver injury by reducing inflammatory responses and the potential mechanism is associated with SIRT1 signaling activation and finally could be used to treat liver diseases.

The pathogenesis of human Ebola virus disease (EVD) is complex. EVD is characterized by high levels of virus replication and dissemination, dysregulated immune responses, extensive virus- and host-mediated tissue damage, and disordered coagulation. To clarify how host responses contribute to EVD pathophysiology, we performed multi-platform 'omics analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and plasma from EVD patients. Our results indicate that EVD molecular signatures overlap with those of sepsis, imply that pancreatic enzymes contribute to tissue damage in fatal EVD, and suggest that Ebola virus infection may induce aberrant neutrophils whose activity could explain hallmarks of fatal EVD. Moreover, integrated biomarker prediction identified putative biomarkers from different data platforms that differentiated survivors and fatalities early after infection. This work reveals insight into EVD pathogenesis, suggests an effective approach for biomarker identification, and provides an important community resource for further analysis of human EVD severity.

A biomarker is a characteristic by which a (patho)physiologic process can be identified. Biomarkers can be of diagnostic value (to discriminate infection from noninfectious conditions or to determine the causative pathogen), of prognostic value (assigning risk profiles and predict outcome), and in the future may be of theranostic value (aid in selection and monitoring of therapy). Systems biology provides a promising tool for the discovery of novel biomarkers. Biomarkers can be the key to personalized targeted treatment in the future clinical management of sepsis.

Despite intensive investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of sepsis, many aspects of sepsis remain unresolved; this hampers the development of appropriate therapeutics. In the present study, we developed a biologic nanomedicine containing a cationic antimicrobial decapeptide KSLW (KKVVFWVKFK), self-associated with biocompatible and biodegradable PEGylated phospholipid micelles (PLM), and analyzed its efficacy for treating sepsis. KSLW was modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG)-aldehyde or was conjugated with distearoylphosphatidylethanolamine (DSPE) -PEG-aldehyde. We compared the antibacterial and antiseptic effects of PEG-KSLW and PLM-KSLW with those of unmodified KSLW both in vitro and in vivo. We found that the PLM-KSLW improved the survival rate of sepsis mouse models without undesired immune responses, and inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced severe vascular inflammatory responses in human umbilical vein endothelial cells compared with unmodified KSLW or PEG-KSLW. Furthermore, PLM-KSLW dramatically reduced the bacterial count and inhibited bacterial growth. We also found a new role of PLM-KSLW in tightening vascular barrier integrity by binding to the glycine/tyrosine-rich domain of occludin (OCLN). Our results showed that PLM-KSLW had a more effective antiseptic effect than KSLW or PEG-KSLW, possibly because of its high affinity toward OCLN. Moreover, PLM-KSLW could be potentially used to treat severe vascular inflammatory diseases, including sepsis and septic shock.

Maternal sepsis remains one of the leading causes of direct and indirect maternal mortality both in high- and low-income environments. In the last two decades, systems biology approaches, based on '-omics' technologies, have started revolutionizing the diagnosis and management of the septic syndrome. The scope of this narrative review is to present an overview of the basic '-omics' technologies, exemplified by cases relevant to maternal sepsis.

Narrative review of the new '-omics' technologies based on a detailed review of the literature.

After presenting the main 'omics' technologies, we discuss their limitations and the need for integrated approaches that encompass research efforts across multiple '-omics' layers in the '-omics' cascade between the genome and the phenome.

Systems biology approaches are revolutionizing the research landscape in maternal sepsis. There is a need for increased awareness, from the side of health practitioners, as a requirement for the effective implementation of the new technologies in the research and clinical practice in maternal sepsis.

The hypothesis being advanced in this paper is that there is a new medical paradigm emerging from the biomedical research carried out in this century, mainly due to the explosion of the so called "omics" and associated techniques. The main idea is that there is a common pathway from wellbeing and health to chronic disease ("chronopathy") and even to death, which comprises following steps: 1) unhealthy diet, sedentary life style and permanent exposition to xenobiotics and all kinds of noxious stimuli;→2) intestinal dysbiosis;→3) alteration of the intestinal mucus layer (especially that of the colon);→4) disruption of the endothelial tight junctions;→5) metabolic endotoxemia+bacterial translocation;→6) inflammation;→7) exacerbation of the enteric nervous system (ENS) and consequent maladaptation and malfunctioning of the colon;→8) epigenetic manifestations;→9) "chronopathy" and premature death. Therefore, in order to maintain a good health or to improve or even reverse chronic diseases in a person, the main outcome to look for is a homeostatic balance of the intestinal microbiota (eubiosis), most of which is located in the colon. Lynn Margulis was one of the main scientists to highlight the importance of the role played by bacteria not only in the origin of all biological species now present on earth, but also on their role in global homeostasis. Bacteria do not rely on other living beings for their existence, while the latter depend completely on the former. Humans are no exemption, and new evidence emerges each day about the pivotal role of intestinal microbiota in human health, disease and, in general, in its wellbeing. The following facts about intestinal microbiota are nowadays generally accepted: there are about 10 times more bacteria in the gut than human cells in every human being; the microbioma is about 100-150 times bigger that the human genome, and there is a clear link between intestinal microbiota and many of the most common chronic diseases, from obesity and diabetes to depression and Parkinson disease and different kinds of cancer. The main implication of this theory is that we should become a sort of microbiota farmers, that is, we ought to be more conscious of our intestinal microbiota, take care of it and monitor it permanently. Thus, as part of our good life habits (healthy eating, physical exercise), we should probably undergo periodic seasons of fasting and colon cleansing, as it was common in older times.

Transforming growth factor-β-induced protein (TGFBIp), an extracellular protein, is expressed on several cell types in response to TGF-β stimulation. Human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC)-derived TGFBIp functions as a mediator of sepsis. Screening of bioactive compound libraries is an effective approach for repositioning FDA-approved drugs or discovering new treatments for human diseases (drug repositioning). Dabrafenib (DAB), a B-Raf inhibitor, was initially used for treating metastatic melanoma. The present study determined whether DAB modulated TGFBIp-mediated septic responses in HUVECs and in mice. Antiseptic functions of DAB were examined by measuring permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and proinflammatory protein activation in TGFBIp-stimulated HUVECs and mice. In addition, beneficial effects of DAB on survival rate were examined using a mouse model of sepsis. We found that DAB inhibited TGFBIp-induced vascular barrier disruption, cell adhesion molecule (CAM) expression, and neutrophil adhesion/transendothelial migration toward human endothelial cells. DAB also suppressed TGFBIp-induced hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in vivo. These results suggest that DAB exerts anti-inflammatory effects by inhibiting hyperpermeability, CAM expression, and leukocyte adhesion and migration, indicating its utility for treating vascular inflammatory diseases.

Sepsis is a life-threatening condition caused by an uncontrolled response to bacterial infection. Impaired bactericidal activity in the host is directly associated with severe sepsis; however, the underlying regulatory mechanism(s) is largely unknown. Here, we show that MCL (macrophage C-type lectin) plays a crucial role in killing bacteria during Escherichia coli-induced peritonitis. MCL-deficient mice with E. coli-induced sepsis showed lower survival rates and reduced bacterial clearance when compared with control mice, despite similar levels of proinflammatory cytokine production. Although the ability of macrophages from MCL-deficient mice to kill bacteria was impaired, they showed normal phagocytic activity and production of reactive oxygen species. In addition, MCL-deficient macrophages showed defective phagosome maturation and phagosomal acidification after E. coli infection. Taken together, these results indicate that MCL plays an important role in host defense against E. coli infection by promoting phagosome maturation and acidification, thereby providing new insight into the role of MCL during pathogenesis of sepsis and offering new therapeutic options.

Acute intestinal ischemic injury (i3) is a life-threatening condition with disastrous prognosis, which is currently difficult to diagnose at the early stages of the disease; a rapid diagnosis is mandatory to avoid irreversible ischemia, extensive bowel resection, sepsis and death. The overlapping protein expression of liver and gut related to the complex physiopathology of the disease, the heterogeneity of the disease and its relative rarity could explain the lack of a useful early biochemical marker of i3. Apart from non-specific biological markers of thrombosis, hypoxia inflammation, and infection, several more specific biomarkers in relation with the gut barrier dysfunction, the villi injury and the enterocyte mass have been used in the diagnosis of acute i3. It includes particularly D-lactate, intestinal fatty acid-binding protein (FABP) and citrulline. Herein, we will discuss leading publications concerning these historical markers that point out the main limitations reagrding their use in routine clinical practice. We will also introduce the first and limited results arising from omic studies, underlying the remaining effort that needs to be done in the field of acute i3 biological diagnosis, which remains a challenge.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a natural isothiocyanate present in cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli and cabbage, is effective in preventing carcinogenesis, diabetes, and inflammatory responses. Inhibition of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) and restoration of endothelial integrity is emerging as an attractive therapeutic strategy in the management of severe sepsis or septic shock. In this study, we examined the effects of SFN on HMGB1-mediated septic responses and survival rate in a mouse sepsis model. The anti-inflammatory activities of SFN were monitored based on its effects on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- or cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-mediated release of HMGB1. The antiseptic activities of SFN were determined by measuring permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and the activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in HMGB1-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. SFN inhibited the release of HMGB1 and downregulated HMGB1-dependent inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells. SFN also inhibited HMGB1-mediated hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, treatment with SFN reduced CLP-induced release of HMGB1 and sepsis-related mortality and pulmonary injury in vivo. Our results indicate that SFN is a possible therapeutic agent that can be used to treat various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via the inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Neisseria meningitidis is a harmless commensal bacterium finely adapted to humans. Unfortunately, under "privileged" conditions, it adopts a "devious" lifestyle leading to uncontrolled behavior characterized by the unleashing of molecular weapons causing potentially lethal disease such as sepsis and acute meningitis. Indeed, despite the lack of a classic repertoire of virulence genes in N. meningitidis separating commensal from invasive strains, molecular epidemiology and functional genomics studies suggest that carriage and invasive strains belong to genetically distinct populations characterized by an exclusive pathogenic potential. In the last few years, "omics" technologies have helped scientists to unwrap the framework drawn by N. meningitidis during different stages of colonization and disease. However, this scenario is still incomplete and would benefit from the implementation of physiological tissue models for the reproduction of mucosal and systemic interactions in vitro. These emerging technologies supported by recent advances in the world of stem cell biology hold the promise for a further understanding of N. meningitidis pathogenesis.

Candida albicans is the most common fungus in the human intestinal microbiota but not in mice. To make a murine sepsis model more closely resemble human sepsis and to explore the role of intestinal C. albicans, in the absence of candidemia, in bacterial sepsis, live- or heat-killed C. albicans was orally administered to mice at 3h prior to cecal ligation and puncture (CLP). A higher mortality rate of CLP was demonstrated with Candida-administration (live- or heat-killed) prior to CLP. Fecal Candida presented only in experiments with live-Candida administration. Despite the absence of candidemia, serum (1→3)-β-D-glucan (BG) was higher in CLP with Candida-administration than CLP-controls (normal saline administration) at 6h and/or 18h post-CLP. Interestingly, fluconazole attenuated the fecal Candida burden and improved survival in mice with live-Candida administration, but not CLP-control. Microbiota analysis revealed increased Bacteroides spp. and reduced Lactobacillus spp. in feces after Candida administration. Additionally, synergy in the elicitation of cytokine production from bone marrow-derived macrophages, in vitro, was demonstrated by co-exposure to heat-killed E. coli and BG. In conclusion, intestinal abundance of fungi and/or fungal-molecules was associated with increased bacterial sepsis-severity, perhaps through enhanced cytokine elicitation induced by synergistic responses to molecules from gut-derived bacteria and fungi. Conversely, reducing intestinal fungal burdens decreased serum BG and attenuated sepsis in our model.

Late onset sepsis (LOS) in preterm infants is associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. While studies have implicated gut bacteria in the aetiology of the disease, functional analysis and mechanistic insights are generally lacking. We performed temporal bacterial (n = 613) and metabolomic (n = 63) profiling on extensively sampled stool from 7 infants with LOS and 28 matched healthy (no LOS or NEC) controls.

The bacteria isolated in diagnostic blood culture usually corresponded to the dominant bacterial genera in the gut microbiome. Longitudinal changes were monitored based on preterm gut community types (PGCTs), where control infants had an increased number of PGCTs compared to LOS infants (P = 0.011). PGCT 6, characterised by Bifidobacteria dominance, was only present in control infants. Metabolite profiles differed between LOS and control infants at diagnosis and 7 days later, but not 7 days prior to diagnosis. Bifidobacteria was positively correlated with control metabolites, including raffinose, sucrose, and acetic acid.

Using multi-omic analysis, we show that the gut microbiome is involved in the pathogenesis of LOS. While the causative agent of LOS varies, it is usually abundant in the gut. Bifidobacteria dominance was associated with control infants, and the presence of this organism may directly protect, or act as a marker for protection, against gut epithelial translocation. While the metabolomic data is preliminary, the findings support that gut development and protection in preterm infants is associated with increased in prebiotic oligosaccharides (e.g. raffinose) and the growth of beneficial bacteria (e.g. Bifidobacterium).

Sepsis remains one of the leading causes of death in the USA and it is expected to get worse as the population ages. Moreover, the standard of care, which recommends aggressive treatment with appropriate antibiotics, has led to an increase in multiple drug-resistant organisms. There is a dire need for the development of new antibiotics, improved antibiotic stewardship, and therapies that treat the host response. Development of new sepsis therapeutics has been a disappointment as no drugs are currently approved to treat the various complications from sepsis. Much of the failure has been blamed on animal models that do not accurately reflect the course of the disease. However, recent improvements in metabolomic, transcriptomic, genomic, and proteomic platforms have allowed for a broad-spectrum look at molecular changes in the host response using clinical samples. Integration of these multi-omic datasets allows researchers to perform systems biology approaches to identify novel pathophysiology of the disease. In this review, we highlight what is currently known about sepsis and how integrative omics has identified new diagnostic and predictive models of sepsis as well as novel mechanisms. These changes may improve patient care as well as guide future preclinical analysis of sepsis.

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is considered a late mediator of sepsis and the inhibition of HMGB1-mediated severe inflammatory responses and restoration of endothelial integrity have emerged as attractive therapeutic strategies for the management of sepsis. Zingerone (ZGR), a phenolic alkanone isolated from ginger, has been reported to possess various pharmacological activities. We examined the effects of ZGR on HMGB1-mediated septic responses and survival rate in a mouse model of sepsis. ZGR was administered after HMGB1 challenge. The antiseptic activity of ZGR was determined from the measurements of permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, activation of pro-inflammatory proteins, and the production of tissue injury markers in HMGB1-activated HUVECs and mice. ZGR significantly reduced HMGB1 release in LPS-activated HUVECs via the SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of HMGB1. And, ZGR suppressed the production of TNF-α and IL-6 and the activation of NF-κB and ERK 1/2 by HMGB1. ZGR also inhibited HMGB1-mediated hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in mice. In addition, treatment with ZGR reduced the CLP-induced release of HMGB1, sepsis-related mortality, and tissue injury in vivo. Our results indicated that ZGR might be useful in the treatment of sepsis by targeting HMGB1.

Infections caused by the facultative intracellular bacterial pathogen Piscirickettsia salmonis remains an unsolved problem for the aquaculture as no efficient treatments have been developed. As a result, substantial amounts of antibiotic have been used to limit salmonid rickettsial septicemia (SRS) disease outbreaks. The antibiotic usage has not reduced the occurrence, but lead to an increase in resistant strains, underlining the need for new treatment strategies. P. salmonis produce membrane vesicles (MVs); small spherical structures know to contain a variety of bacterial components, including proteins, lipopolysaccharides (LPS), DNA and RNA. MVs mimics' in many aspects their mother cell, and has been reported as alternative vaccine candidates. Here, MVs from P. salmonis was isolated and evaluated as a vaccine candidate against SRS in an adult zebrafish infection model. When zebrafish was immunized with MVs they were protected from subsequent challenge with a lethal dose of P. salmonis. Histological analysis showed a reduced bacterial load upon challenge in the MV immunized group, and the mRNA expression levels of several immune related genes altered, including mpeg1.1, tnfα, il1b, il10 and il6. The MVs induced the secretion of IgM upon immunization, indicating an immunogenic effect of the vesicles. Taken together, the data demonstrate a vaccine potential of MVs against P. salmonis.

As a natural compound extracted from the roots of Cudrania tricuspidata Bureau, Cudratricusxanthone A (CTXA) is known to possess hepatoprotective, anti-inflammatory, and anti-proliferative activities. This study was aimed to clarify the role of CTXA in modulating renal functional damage in a mouse model of sepsis and to elucidate its underlying mechanisms. We examined the renal protective effects of CTXA on cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced renal damage by assessment of serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), lipid peroxidation, total glutathione, glutathione peroxidase activity, catalase activity, and superoxide dismutase activity. Post-treatment with CTXA resulted in a significant reduction in the deleterious renal functions by CLP, such as elevated BUN, creatinine, and urine protein. Induction of nitric oxide synthase and excessive production of nitric acid by CLP surgery were significantly reduced by post-treatment with CTXA via inhibiting nuclear factor-κB activation. Furthermore, the plasma levels of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α were suppressed by CTXA post-treatment. Concurrently, CTXA treatment potently suppressed the CLP-induced septic lethality, rise of lipid peroxidation and markedly enhanced the antioxidant defense system by restoring the levels of superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase in kidney. The present results suggested that CTXA could protect against sepsis-triggered renal injury in mice.

Zingerone (ZGR), a phenolic alkanone isolated from ginger, has been reported to possess various pharmacological activities. Transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein whose expression in several cell types is greatly increased by TGF-β. TGFBIp is released by human umbilical vein endothelial cells and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. We hypothesized that ZGR could reduce TGFBIp-mediated severe inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells and mice. Here, we investigated the anti-septic effects and underlying mechanisms of ZGR against TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. ZGR effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced release of TGFBIp and suppressed TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. In addition, ZGR suppressed TGFBIp-induced sepsis lethality and pulmonary injury. In conclusion, ZGR suppressed TGFBIp-mediated and CLP-induced septic responses. Therefore, ZGR could be a potential therapeutic agent for treatment of various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via inhibition of the TGFBIp signaling pathway.

The role of intestinal Candida albicans in bacterial sepsis, in the absence of candidemia, was investigated in murine models. Live C albicans or normal saline solution (NSS) was administered orally once, followed by 5 days of daily oral antibiotic-mixtures (ATB). Cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) was then performed to induce sepsis.Fecal Candida was detected by culture only in models with Candida administration. Oral Candida administration with/without ATB enhanced gut-pathogenic bacteria as determined by microbiome analysis. Despite negative candidemia, serum (1→3)-β-D-glucan (BG) was higher in CLP with Candida preconditioning models than in CLP-controls (NSS-preconditioning) at 6 and/or 18 h post-CLP. Blood bacterial burdens were not increased with Candida administration.Additionally, CLP with high-dose Candida (10 colony forming units) induced higher levels of fecal Candida, serum BG, serum IL-6, and mortality than the lowest dose (100 colony forming units). Interestingly, fluconazole attenuated fecal Candida and improved survival in mice with live-Candida administration, but not in the CLP-controls. Heat-killed Candida preparations or their supernatants reduced bone marrow-derived macrophage killing activity in vitro but enhanced cytokine production.In conclusion, intestinal abundance of fungi and/or fungal-molecules was associated with increased bacterial sepsis severity, perhaps through cytokine storm induction and/or decreased macrophage killing activity. These observations suggest that further investigation of the potential role of intestinal fungal burdens in sepsis is warranted.

Precision medicine is increasingly touted as a groundbreaking new paradigm in biomedicine. In the ICU, the complexity and ambiguity of critical illness syndromes have been identified as fundamental justifications for the adoption of a precision approach to research and practice. Inherently protean diseases states such as sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome have manifestations that are physiologically and anatomically diffuse, and that fluctuate over short periods of time. This leads to considerable heterogeneity among patients, and conditions in which a "one size fits all" approach to therapy can lead to widely divergent results. Current ICU therapy can thus be seen as imprecise, with the potential to realize substantial gains from the adoption of precision medicine approaches. A number of challenges still face the development and adoption of precision critical care, a transition that may occur incrementally rather than wholesale. This article describes a few concrete approaches to addressing these challenges.First, novel clinical trial designs, including registry randomized controlled trials and platform trials, suggest ways in which conventional trials can be adapted to better accommodate the physiologic heterogeneity of critical illness. Second, beyond the "omics" technologies already synonymous with precision medicine, the data-rich environment of the ICU can generate complex physiologic signatures that could fuel precision-minded research and practice. Third, the role of computing infrastructure and modern informatics methods will be central to the pursuit of precision medicine in the ICU, necessitating close collaboration with data scientists. As work toward precision critical care continues, small proof-of-concept studies may prove useful in highlighting the potential of this approach.

Microvesicles (MVs) are involved in cell-cell interactions, including disease pathogenesis. Nondestructive Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra from MVs were assessed as a technique to provide new biochemical insights into a LPS-induced monocyte model of septic shock. FTIR spectroscopy provided a quick method to investigate relative differences in biomolecular content of different MV populations that was complementary to traditional semiquantitative omics approaches, with which it is difficult to provide information on relative changes between classes (proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, carbohydrates) or protein conformations. Time-dependent changes were detected in biomolecular contents of MVs and in the monocytes from which they were released. Differences in phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine contents were observed in MVs released under stimulation, and higher relative concentrations of RNA and α-helical structured proteins were present in stimulated MVs compared with MVs from resting cells. FTIR spectra of stimulated monocytes displayed changes that were consistent with those observed in the corresponding MVs they released. LPS-stimulated monocytes had reduced concentrations of nucleic acids, α-helical structured proteins, and phosphatidylcholine compared with resting monocytes but had an increase in total lipids. FTIR spectra of MV biomolecular content will be important in shedding new light on the mechanisms of MVs and the different roles they play in physiology and disease pathogenesis.-Lee, J., Wen, B., Carter, E. A., Combes, V., Grau, G. E. R., Lay, P. A. Infrared spectroscopic characterization of monocytic microvesicles (microparticles) released upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

Progress in sepsis research has been severely hampered by a heterogeneous disease phenotype, limiting the interpretation of clinical trials and the development of effective therapeutic interventions. Application of omics-based methodologies is advancing understanding of the dysregulated host immune response to infection in sepsis. However, the frequently elusive nature of the infecting organism in sepsis has limited efforts to understand the effect of disease heterogeneity involving the pathogen. Recent advances in nucleic acid sequencing-based pathogen analysis provide the opportunity for more accurate and comprehensive microbiological diagnosis. In this Review, we explore how better understanding of the host-pathogen interaction can substantially enhance, and in turn benefit from, current and future application of omics-based approaches to understand the host response in sepsis. We illustrate this using recent work accounting for heterogeneity involving the pathogen. We propose that there is a timely opportunity to further resolve sepsis heterogeneity by considering host-pathogen interactions, enabling progress towards a precision medicine approach.

The introduction of omics technologies in the field of Transfusion Medicine has significantly advanced our understanding of the red cell storage lesion. While the clinical relevance of such a lesion is still a matter of debate, quantitative and redox proteomics approaches, as well quantitative metabolic flux analysis and metabolic tracing experiments promise to revolutionise our understanding of the role of blood processing strategies, inform the design and testing of novel additives or technologies (such as pathogen reduction), and evaluate the clinical relevance of donor and recipient biological variability with respect to red cell storability and transfusion outcomes. By reviewing existing literature in this rapidly expanding research endeavour, we highlight for the first time a correlation between metabolic markers of the red cell storage age and protein markers of haemolysis. Finally, we introduce the concept of metabolic linkage, i.e. the appreciation of a network of highly correlated small molecule metabolites which results from biochemical constraints of erythrocyte metabolic enzyme activities. For the foreseeable future, red cell studies will advance Transfusion Medicine and haematology by addressing the alteration of metabolic linkage phenotypes in response to stimuli, including, but not limited to, storage additives, enzymopathies (e.g. glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency), hypoxia, sepsis or haemorrhage.

Sepsis is a serious medical condition that occurs in 30% of patients in intensive care units (ICUs). Early detection of sepsis is key to prevent its progression to severe sepsis and septic shock, which can cause organ failure and death. Diagnostic criteria for sepsis are nonspecific and hinder a timely diagnosis in patients. Therefore, there is currently a large effort to detect biomarkers that can aid physicians in the diagnosis and prognosis of sepsis. Mass spectrometry is often the method of choice to detect metabolomic and proteomic changes that occur during sepsis progression. These "omics" strategies allow for untargeted profiling of thousands of metabolites and proteins from human biological samples obtained from septic patients. Differential expression of or modifications to these metabolites and proteins can provide a more reliable source of diagnostic biomarkers for sepsis. Here, we focus on the current knowledge of biomarkers of sepsis and discuss the various mass spectrometric technologies used in their detection. We consider studies of the metabolome and proteome and summarize information regarding potential biomarkers in both general and neonatal sepsis.

The screening of bioactive compound libraries can be an effective approach for repositioning FDA-approved drugs or discovering new treatments for human diseases (drug repositioning). Drug repositioning refers to the development of existing drugs for new indications. Dabrafenib (DAB) is a B-Raf inhibitor and initially used for the treatment of metastatic melanoma therapy. Here, we tested the possible use of DAB in the treatment of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated vascular inflammatory responses. The anti-inflammatory activities of DAB were determined by measuring permeability, neutrophils adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in LPS-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. We found that DAB inhibited LPS-induced barrier disruption, expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), and adhesion and transendothelial migration of neutrophils to human endothelial cells. DAB also suppressed LPS-induced hyperpermeability and leukocytes migration in vivo. Furthermore, DAB suppressed the production of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) or interleukin (IL)-6 and the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) or extracellular regulated kinases (ERK) 1/2 by LPS. Moreover, treatment with DAB resulted in reduced LPS-induced lethal endotoxemia. These results suggest that DAB possesses anti-inflammatory functions by inhibiting hyperpermeability, expression of CAMs, and adhesion and migration of leukocytes, thereby endorsing its usefulness as a therapy for vascular inflammatory diseases.

Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response to bacterial infection. The therapeutic options for treating sepsis are limited. Impaired neutrophil recruitment into the infection site is directly associated with severe sepsis, but the precise mechanism is unclear. Here, we show that Mincle plays a key role in neutrophil migration and resistance during polymicrobial sepsis. Mincle-deficient mice exhibited lower survival rates in experimental sepsis from cecal ligation and puncture and Escherichia coli-induced peritonitis. Mincle deficiency led to higher serum inflammatory cytokine levels and reduced bacterial clearance and neutrophil recruitment. Transcriptome analyses revealed that trehalose dimycolate, a Mincle ligand, reduced the expression of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) in neutrophils. Indeed, GRK2 expression was upregulated, but surface expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR2 was downregulated in blood neutrophils from Mincle-deficient mice with septic injury. Moreover, CXCL2-mediated adhesion, chemotactic responses, and F-actin polymerization were reduced in Mincle-deficient neutrophils. Finally, we found that fewer Mincle-deficient neutrophils infiltrated from the blood circulation into the peritoneal fluid in bacterial septic peritonitis compared with wild-type cells. Thus, our results indicate that Mincle plays an important role in neutrophil infiltration and suggest that Mincle signaling may provide a therapeutic target for treating sepsis.

Transforming growth factor β induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein expressed in several cell types in response to TGF-β. TGFBIp is released by human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. Pelargonidin (PEL) is a well-known red pigment found in plants, and has been reported as having important biological activities that are potentially beneficial for human health. This study was undertaken to investigate whether PEL can modulate TGFBIp-mediated inflammatory responses in HUVECs and in mice. The anti-inflammatory activities of PEL were determined by measuring permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and activation of proinflammatory proteins in TGFBIp-activated HUVECs and mice. In addition, the beneficial effects of PEL on survival rate in a mouse sepsis model were tested. We found that PEL inhibited TGFBIp-induced barrier disruption, expression of cell adhesion molecules and adhesion/transendothelial migration of neutrophils to human endothelial cells. PEL also suppressed TGFBIp-induced hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in vivo. These results suggest that PEL possesses anti-inflammatory properties that result in inhibition of hyperpermeability, expression of cell adhesion molecules, and adhesion and migration of leukocytes, thereby endorsing its usefulness as a therapy for vascular inflammatory diseases.

Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory condition resulting from bacterial infections. It is associated with high mortality rates, and its therapeutic options are limited. Transforming growth factor β induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein that functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. C-27-carboxylated pentacyclic triterpenoids are specifically found in species of the genus Astilbe, and show several biological effects. Given the anti-inflammatory effects of pentacyclic triterpenoids, we investigated the effects of 3β-trans-p-coumaroyloxy-olean-12-en-27-oic acid (1) and 6β-hydroxy-3-oxoolean-12-en-27-oic acid (2) on TGFBIp-mediated vascular inflammatory responses. The anti-inflammatory activities of compounds 1 and 2 were determined by measuring the permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in TGFBIp-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. We found that compounds 1 and 2 inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced TGFBIp secretion, TGFBIp-induced barrier disruption, expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), and the adhesion/transendothelial migration of the neutrophils to the human endothelial cells. Compounds 1 and 2 also suppressed TGFBIp-induced hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in vivo. These results suggested that C-27-carboxylated pentacyclic triterpenoids 1 and 2 have anti-inflammatory functions by inhibiting hyperpermeability, CAM expression, and leukocyte adhesion/migration. Therefore, these compounds can be considered as a potential therapy for vascular inflammatory diseases.

A certain nucleosomal protein-high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1)-has recently been established as a late mediator of sepsis, with a relatively wide therapeutic window for pharmacological intervention. Pelargonidin (PEL) is a well-known red pigment found in plants; it has important biological activities that are potentially beneficial for human health. In the present study, we investigated whether PEL can modulate HMGB1-mediated inflammatory responses in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and in mice. The anti-inflammatory activities of PEL were determined by measuring permeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in HMGB1-activated HUVECs and mice, as well as the beneficial effects of PEL on survival rate in the mouse sepsis model. The data showed that PEL had effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced release of HMGB1 and suppressed HMGB1-mediated septic responses, such as hyperpermeability, adhesion and migration of leukocytes, and expression of cell adhesion molecules. Furthermore, PEL inhibited the HMGB1-mediated production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 6 (IL-6), as well as the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2). Collectively, these results indicate that PEL could be used to treat various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via the inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Piscirickettsia salmonis (P. salmonis) is the aetiological bacterium of the contagious disease piscirickettsiosis or salmonid rickettsial septicaemia (SRS) and causes significant economic losses to aquaculture production in Chile. Current strategies to control infection are i) indiscriminate antibiotic use and ii) vaccination with predominantly P. salmonis bacterin vaccines that do not provide acceptable levels of protection against piscirickettsiosis. Areas covered: This review covers the basic biology of P. salmonis, clinical piscirickettsiosis and disease control, the development of current P. salmonis vaccines, innate and adaptive immunity and a 5-year plan to develop new piscirickettsiosis vaccines. Expert commentary: Fundamental knowledge is lacking on the complexities of P. salmonis-host interactions, relating to bacterial virulence and host innate and adaptive immune responses, which needs to be addressed. The development of new P. salmonis vaccines needs the application of comprehensive 'omics' technologies to identify candidate vaccine antigens capable of stimulating long-lasting protective immune responses.

The nucleosomal protein high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), which has recently been established as a late mediator of lethal systemic inflammation, has a relatively wide therapeutic window for pharmacological interventions. Compounds produced by marine-derived microbes have been widely investigated for their potential use as bioactive natural products. Cyclic dipeptides, which are also known as diketopiperazines, are molecules that are frequently found in marine-derived microorganisms. While their pharmacological potential has been well established, their biological activities against septic responses have not yet been reported. Here, three diketopiperazines (1-3) isolated from two strains of marine-derived bacteria were investigated for their potential activities against HMGB1-mediated septic responses. The data showed that 1-3 effectively inhibited the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced release of HMGB1 and suppressed the HMGB1-mediated septic responses, including hyperpermeability, leukocyte adhesion and migration, and cell adhesion molecule expression. In addition, 1-3 inhibited the HMGB1-mediated production of tumor necrosis factor-[Formula: see text] (TNF-[Formula: see text] and interleukin (IL)-6 and the activation of nuclear factor-[Formula: see text]B (NF-[Formula: see text]B) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1 and ERK2. Collectively, these results indicated that 1-3 might act as potential therapeutic agents for various severe vascular inflammatory diseases through the inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Care in pediatrics often refers to treatments directed to adults. However, childhood is a specific life period, with molecular pathways connected to development and thereby it requires distinctive considerations and special treatments under disease. Proteomics can help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the human development and disease onset in pediatric age and this review is devoted to underline the results recently obtained in the field.

The contribution of proteomics to the characterization of physiological modifications occurring during human development is presented. The proteomic studies carried out to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying different pediatric pathologies and to discover new markers for early diagnosis and prognosis of disease, comprising genetic and systemic pathologies, sepsis and pediatric oncology are thereafter reported. The investigations concerning milk composition in human and farm mammals are also presented. Finally, the chances offered by the integration of different -omic platforms are discussed. Expert commentary: The growing utilization of holistic technologies such as proteomics, metabolomics and microbiomics will allow, in the near future, to define at the molecular level the complexity of human development and related diseases, with great benefit for future generations.

Diketopiperazine is a natural products found from bacteria, fungi, marine sponges, gorgonian and red algae. They are cyclic dipeptides possessing relatively simple and rigid structures with chiral nature and various side chains. The compounds in this structure class have been known to possess diverse bioactivities including antibiotic activity, anti-cancer activity, neuroprotective activity, and anti-inflammatory activity. Previous studies have reported proinflammatory responses of endothelial cells to the release of polyphosphate (PolyP). In this study, we examined the anti-inflammatory responses and mechanisms of diketopiperazine and its effects on PolyP-induced septic activities in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. The survival rates, septic biomarker levels, behavior of human neutrophils, and vascular permeability were determined in PolyP-activated HUVECs and mice. Diketopiperazine suppressed the PolyP-mediated vascular barrier permeability, upregulation of inflammatory biomarkers, adhesion/migration of leukocytes, and activation and/or production of nuclear factor-κB, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-6. Furthermore, diketopiperazine demonstrated protective effects on PolyP-mediated lethal death and the levels of the related septic biomarkers. Therefore, these results indicated the therapeutic potential of diketopiperazine on various systemic inflammatory diseases, such as sepsis or septic shock.

The screening of bioactive compound libraries can be an effective approach for repositioning FDA-approved drugs or discovering new treatments for human diseases. Previous studies have reported polyphosphate (PolyP)-mediated vascular inflammatory responses such as disruption of vascular integrity. Dabrafenib is a B-Raf inhibitor and initially used for the treatment of metastatic melanoma therapy. This study illustrates drug repositioning with dabrafenib (DAB) for the modulation of PolyP-mediated vascular inflammatory responses in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. The survival rates, septic biomarker levels, behavior of human neutrophils, and vascular permeability were determined in PolyP-activated HUVECs and mice. Dabrafenib suppressed the PolyP-mediated vascular barrier permeability, upregulation of inflammatory biomarkers, adhesion/migration of leukocytes, and activation and/or production of nuclear factor-κB, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-6. Furthermore, dabrafenib demonstrated protective effects on PolyP-mediated lethal death and the levels of the related septic biomarkers. Therefore, these results indicated the therapeutic potential of dabrafenib on various systemic inflammatory diseases, such as sepsis or septic shock.

Drug repositioning is used to discover drug candidates to treat human diseases, through the application of drugs or compounds that are approved for the treatment of other diseases. This method can significantly reduce the time required and cost of discovering new drug candidates for human diseases. Previous studies have reported pro-inflammatory responses of endothelial cells to the release of polyphosphate (PolyP). In this study, we examined the anti-inflammatory responses and mechanisms of methylthiouracil (MTU), which is an antithyroid drug, and its effects on PolyP-induced septic activities in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. The survival rates, septic biomarker levels, behaviour of human neutrophils and vascular permeability were determined in PolyP-activated HUVECs and mice. MTU suppressed the PolyP-mediated vascular barrier permeability, up-regulation of inflammatory biomarkers, adhesion/migration of leucocytes, and activation and/or production of nuclear factor-κB, tumour necrosis factor-α and interleukin-6. Furthermore, MTU demonstrated protective effects on PolyP-mediated lethal death and the levels of the related septic biomarkers. Therefore, these results indicated the therapeutic potential of MTU on various systemic inflammatory diseases, such as sepsis or septic shock.

Transforming growth factor β induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein which expression in several cell types is greatly increased by TGF-β. TGFBIp is released by human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. Pentacyclic triterpenoids bearing a carboxyl group at C-27 position, 3β,6α-dihydroxyolup-20(29)-ene (1), 3β,6β-dihydroxyolean-12-en-27-oic acid (2) and 3β,24-dihydroxyolean-12-en-27-oic acid (3), are representative bioactive molecules in the genus Astilbe that possess cytotoxic, anti-inflammatory and wounds healing activities. Based on the biological effects of C-27 carboxylated pentacyclic triterpenoids, we investigated the anti-inflammatory effects of compounds 1-3 against TGFBIp-mediated vascular inflammatory responses. The anti-inflammatory activities of compounds 1-3 were determined by measuring permeability, leukocytes adhesion and migration, and activation of pro-inflammatory proteins in TGFBIp-activated human HUVECs and mice. We found that compounds 1-3 inhibited TGFBIp-induced barrier disruption, expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) and adhesion/transendothelial migration of neutrophils to human endothelial cells. Each compound also suppressed TGFBIp-induced hyperpermeability and leukocyte migration in vivo. These results suggest that compounds 1-3 possess anti-inflammatory functions by inhibiting hyperpermeability, expression of CAMs, and adhesion and migration of leukocytes, thereby endorsing its usefulness as a therapy for vascular inflammatory diseases.

The emergence of antibiotic resistant pathogenic bacteria has reduced our ability to combat infectious diseases. At the same time the numbers of new antibiotics reaching the market have decreased. This situation has created an urgent need to discover novel antibiotic scaffolds. Recently, the application of pattern recognition techniques to identify molecular fingerprints in 'omics' studies, has emerged as an important tool in biomedical research and laboratory medicine to identify pathogens, to monitor therapeutic treatments or to develop drugs with improved metabolic stability, toxicological profile and efficacy. Here, we hypothesize that a combination of metabolic intracellular fingerprints and extracellular footprints would provide a more comprehensive picture about the mechanism of action of novel antibiotics in drug discovery programs.

In an attempt to integrate the metabolomics approach as a classification tool in the drug discovery processes, we have used quantitative (1)H NMR spectroscopy to study the metabolic response of Escherichia coli cultures to different antibiotics. Within the frame of our study the effects of five different and well-known antibiotic classes on the bacterial metabolome were investigated both by intracellular fingerprint and extracellular footprint analysis. The metabolic fingerprints and footprints of bacterial cultures were affected in a distinct manner and provided complementary information regarding intracellular and extracellular targets such as protein synthesis, DNA and cell wall. While cell cultures affected by antibiotics that act on intracellular targets showed class-specific fingerprints, the metabolic footprints differed significantly only when antibiotics that target the cell wall were applied. In addition, using a training set of E. coli fingerprints extracted after treatment with different antibiotic classes, the mode of action of streptomycin, tetracycline and carbenicillin could be correctly predicted.

The metabolic profiles of E. coli treated with antibiotics with intracellular and extracellular targets could be separated in fingerprint and footprint analysis, respectively and provided complementary information. Based on the specific fingerprints obtained for different classes of antibiotics, the mode of action of several antibiotics could be predicted. The same classification approach should be applicable to studies of other pathogenic bacteria.

Lysozyme, found in relatively high concentration in blood, saliva, tears, and milk, protects us from the ever-present danger of bacterial infection. Previous studies have reported proinflammatory responses of endothelial cells to the release of polyphosphate(PolyP). In this study, we examined the anti-inflammatory responses and mechanisms of lysozyme and its effects on PolyP-induced septic activities in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and mice. The survival rates, septic biomarker levels, behavior of human neutrophils, and vascular permeability were determined in PolyP-activated HUVECs and mice. Lysozyme suppressed the PolyP-mediated vascular barrier permeability, upregulation of inflammatory biomarkers, adhesion/migration of leukocytes, and activation and/or production of nuclear factor-κB, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-6. Furthermore, lysozyme demonstrated protective effects on PolyP-mediated lethal death and the levels of the related septic biomarkers. Therefore, these results indicated the therapeutic potential of lysozyme on various systemic inflammatory diseases, such as sepsis or septic shock.

The ubiquitous nuclear protein, high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) functions as a late mediator of sepsis. A new rarely occurring C-methylrotenoid, named boeravinone X (comp 1), was isolated and identified from Abronia nana suspension cultures during our continuous works on the discovery of anti-septic natural products. Here, we investigated the antiseptic effects and underlying mechanisms of comp 1 against HMGB1-mediated septic responses. According to the results, comp 1 effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced release of HMGB1, and suppressed HMGB1-mediated septic responses, such as hyperpermeability, adhesion and migration of leukocytes, and expression of cell adhesion molecules. And, comp 1 suppressed the production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 6 (IL-6), and the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) by HMGB1. Collectively, these results indicate that comp 1 could be potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via inhibition of the HMGB1 signaling pathway.

Diketopiperazine is a naturally occurring cyclic dipeptide found from diverse living organisms. The compounds in this structure class have been known with a broad spectrum of bioactivities including anti-inflammatory activities. Transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) is an extracellular matrix protein whose expression in several cell types is greatly increased by TGF-β. TGFBIp is released by human umbilical vein endothelial cells and functions as a mediator of experimental sepsis. Here, three (1-3) of diketopiperazines were isolated from two strains of marine-derived bacteria and we hypothesized that 1-3 could reduce TGFBIp-mediated severe inflammatory responses in human endothelial cells and mice. Here, we investigated the anti-septic effects and underlying mechanisms of 1-3 against TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. 1-3 effectively inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced release of TGFBIp and suppressed TGFBIp-mediated septic responses. In addition, 1-3 suppressed cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced sepsis lethality and pulmonary injury. In conclusion, 1-3 suppressed TGFBIp-mediated and CLP-induced septic responses. Therefore, 1-3 could be a potential therapeutic agent for treatment of various severe vascular inflammatory diseases via inhibition of the TGFBIp signaling pathway.

Diketopiperazine is a natural products found from bacteria, fungi, marine sponges, gorgonian and red algae. They are cyclic dipeptides possessing relatively simple and rigid structures with chiral nature and various side chains. The compounds in this structure class have been known to possess diverse bioactivities including antibiotic activity, anti-cancer activity, neuroprotective activity, and anti-inflammatory activity. The endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) plays an important role in the cytoprotective pathway and in the activation of protein C. Endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) can be shed from the cell surface, which is mediated by tumor necrosis factor-α converting enzyme (TACE). However, little is known about the effects of diketopiperazine on EPCR shedding. We investigated this issue by monitoring the effects of diketopiperazine on phorbol-12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and interleukin (IL)-1β-induced EPCR shedding in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), and cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-mediated EPCR shedding in mice and underlying mechanism. Here, three (1-3) of diketopiperazines were isolated from two strains of marine-derived bacteria and 1-3 induced potent inhibition of PMA-, TNF-α-, IL-1β (in HUVECs), and CLP-induced EPCR shedding (in mice) via inhibition of phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) such as p38, janus kinase (JNK), and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2. 1-3 also inhibited the expression and activity of PMA-induced TACE in HUVECs suggesting that p38, ERK1/2, and JNK could be molecular targets of 1-3. These results demonstrate the potential of 1-3 as an anti-EPCR shedding reagent against PMA-mediated and CLP-mediated EPCR shedding.

Diketopiperazine is a natural products found from bacteria, fungi, marine sponges, gorgonian and red algae. They are cyclic dipeptides possessing relatively simple and rigid structures with chiral nature and various side chains. Endothelial dysfunction is a key pathological feature of many inflammatory diseases, including sepsis. In the present study, three (1-3) of diketopiperazines were isolated from two strains of marine-derived bacteria. The compounds were investigated for their effects against lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated endothelial inflammatory responses in vitro and in vivo. From 1 μM, 1-3 inhibited LPS-induced hyperpermeability, adhesion, and migration of leukocytes across a human endothelial cell monolayer and in mice in a dose-dependent manner suggesting that 1-3 may serve as potential scaffolds for the development of therapeutic agents to treat vascular inflammatory disorders.

Exendin-4 (EX4), a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist that regulates blood glucose levels, has been used in the management of type-2 diabetes mellitus. EX4 can be PEGylated to improve its antidiabetic effects by enhancing its stability and extending the circulation half-life. Here, to determine whether PEGylated EX4 is effective for the treatment of sepsis, C-terminal thiol-specific PEGylated EX4s with linear maleimide-PEG-2K, -5K, -20K and trimeric maleimide-PEG-50K (hereafter referred to as EX4-2K, EX4-5K, EX4-20K, and EX4-50K, respectively) were prepared, and their antiseptic responses were investigated. These PEGylated EX4s reduced cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced organ injury by decreasing hyperpermeability, and suppressing interactions between leukocytes and endothelial cells. The binding avidity and stability of EX4-50K toward GLP-1R were superior to that of wild-type EX4, as was the circulation half-life of EX4-50K. In addition, the antiseptic effects of EX4-50K were superior to those of other PEGylated EX4s, which may be attributed to enhanced proteolytic stability, longer circulation half-life, and higher receptor-binding affinity of EX4-50K due to its trimeric PEG structure. Therefore, EX4-50K may decrease CLP-induced septic mortality in vivo. There are currently neither effective preventatives against nor treatment options for sepsis; our results show that EX4-50K has the potential to treat sepsis.

The ShockOmics study (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02141607) is a multicenter prospective observational trial aimed at identifying new biomarkers of acute heart failure in circulatory shock, by means of a multiscale analysis of blood samples and hemodynamic data from subjects with circulatory shock.

Ninety septic shock and cardiogenic shock patients will be recruited in three intensive care units (ICU) (Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium; Hospital Universitari Mutua Terrassa, Spain; Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Switzerland). Hemodynamic signals will be recorded every day for up to seven days from shock diagnosis (time T0). Clinical data and blood samples will be collected for analysis at: i) T1 < 16 h from T0; ii) T2 = 48 h after T0; iii) T3 = day 7 or before discharge or before discontinuation of therapy in case of fatal outcome; iv) T4 = day 100. The inclusion criteria are: shock, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score > 5 and lactate levels ≥ 2 mmol/L. The exclusion criteria are: expected death within 24 h since ICU admission; > 4 units of red blood cells or >1 fresh frozen plasma transfused; active hematological malignancy; metastatic cancer; chronic immunodepression; pre-existing end stage renal disease requiring renal replacement therapy; recent cardiac surgery; Child-Pugh C cirrhosis; terminal illness. Enrollment will be preceded by the signature of the Informed Consent by the patient or his/her relatives and by the physician in charge. Three non-shock control groups will be included in the study: a) healthy blood donors (n = 5); b) septic patients (n = 10); c) acute myocardial infarction or patients with prolonged acute arrhythmia (n = 10). The hemodynamic data will be downloaded from the ICU monitors by means of dedicated software. The blood samples will be utilized for transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics ("-omics") analyses.

ShockOmics will provide new insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying shock as well as new biomarkers for the timely diagnosis of cardiac dysfunction in shock and quantitative indices for assisting the therapeutic management of shock patients.

Survivors from sepsis are in an immunosuppressed state that is associated with higher long-term mortality and risk of opportunistic infections. Whether these factors contribute to neoplastic proliferation, however, remains unclear. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) can support malignant cell proliferation, survival, and angiogenesis. We addressed the relationship between the post-sepsis state, tumor progression and TAM accumulation, and phenotypic and genetic profile, using a mouse model of sepsis resolution and then B16 melanoma in mice. In addition, we measured the serum concentrations of TNFα, TGFβ, CCL2, and CXCL12 and determined the effect of in vivo CXCR4/CXCL12 inhibition in this context. Mice that survived sepsis showed increased tumor progression both in the short and long term, and survival times were shorter. TAM accumulation, TAM local proliferation, and serum concentrations of TGFβ, CXCL12, and TNFα were increased. Naïve mice inoculated with B16 together with macrophages from post-sepsis mice also had faster tumor progression and shorter survival. Post-sepsis TAMs had less expression of MHC-II and leukocyte activation-related genes. Inhibition of CXCR4/CXCL12 prevented the post-sepsis-induced tumor progression, TAM accumulation, and TAM in situ proliferation. Collectively, our data show that the post-sepsis state was associated with TAM accumulation through CXCR4/CXCL12, which contributed to B16 melanoma progression.

Measurement of health indicators in the blood is a commonly performed diagnostic procedure. Two blood studies one involving extended observations on the health of an individual by integrative Personal Omics Profiling (iPOP), and the other tracking the impact of Left Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD) placement on nine heart failure patients were examined for the association of change in health status with change in microbial RNA species. Decrease in RNA expression ratios of human to bacteria and viruses accompanying deteriorated conditions was evident in both studies. Despite large between-subject variations in bacterial composition before LVAD implantation among all the patients, on day 180 after the implantation they manifested apparent between-subject bacterial similarity. In the iPOP study three periods, namely, pre-respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection with normal blood glucose level, RSV infection with normal blood glucose level, and post-RSV infection with high blood glucose level could be defined. The upsurge of Enterobacteria phage PhiX 174 sensu lato and Escherichia coli gene expression, in which membrane transporters, membrane receptors for environment signalling, carbohydrate catabolic genes and carbohydrate-active enzymes were enriched only throughout the second period, which suggests a potentially overlooked microbial response to or modulation of the host blood glucose level.

A century of advances in infectious disease diagnosis and treatment changed the face of medicine. However, challenges continue to develop including multi-drug resistance, globalization that increases pandemic risks and high mortality from severe infections. These challenges can be mitigated through improved diagnostics, focusing on both pathogen discovery and the host response. Here, we review how 'omics' technologies improve sepsis diagnosis, early pathogen identification and personalize therapy. Such host response diagnostics are possible due to the confluence of advanced laboratory techniques (e.g., transcriptomics, metabolomics, proteomics) along with advanced mathematical modeling such as machine learning techniques. The road ahead is promising, but obstacles remain before the impact of such advanced diagnostic modalities is felt at the bedside.

Biomarkers have been used to differentiate systemic neonatal infection and necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) from other non-infective neonatal conditions that share similar clinical features. With increasing understanding in biochemical characteristics of different categories of biomarkers, a specific mediator or a panel of mediators have been used in different aspects of clinical management in neonatal sepsis/NEC. This review focuses on how these biomarkers can be used in real-life clinical settings for daily surveillance, bedside point-of-care testing, early diagnosis and predicting the severity and prognosis of neonatal sepsis/NEC. In addition, with recent development of 'multi-omic' approaches and rapid advancement in knowledge of bioinformatics, more novel biomarkers and unique signatures of mediators would be discovered for diagnosis of specific diseases and organ injuries.

In this meta-study, we aimed to integrate biological insights gained from two levels of -omics analyses on the response to systemic inflammation induced by lipopolysaccharide in humans. We characterized the interplay between plasma metabolite compositions and transcriptional response of leukocytes through integration of transcriptomics with plasma metabonomics. We hypothesized that the drastic changes in the immediate environment of the leukocytes might have an adaptive effect on shaping their transcriptional response in conjunction with the initial inflammatory stimuli. Indeed, we observed that leukocytes, most notably, tune the activity of lipid- and protein-associated processes at the transcriptional level in accordance with the fluctuations in metabolite compositions of surrounding plasma. A closer look into the transcriptional control of only metabolic pathways uncovered alterations in bioenergetics and defenses against oxidative stress closely associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and shifts in energy production observed during inflammatory processes.

Sepsis is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Currently, early diagnosis and the progression of the disease are difficult to make. The integration of metabolomic and transcriptomic data in a primate model of sepsis may provide a novel molecular signature of clinical sepsis.

To develop a biomarker panel to characterize sepsis in primates and ascertain its relevance to early diagnosis and progression of human sepsis.

Intravenous inoculation of Macaca fascicularis with Escherichia coli produced mild to severe sepsis, lung injury, and death. Plasma samples were obtained before and after 1, 3, and 5 days of E. coli challenge and at the time of killing. At necropsy, blood, lung, kidney, and spleen samples were collected. An integrative analysis of the metabolomic and transcriptomic datasets was performed to identify a panel of sepsis biomarkers.

The extent of E. coli invasion, respiratory distress, lethargy, and mortality was dependent on the bacterial dose. Metabolomic and transcriptomic changes characterized severe infections and death, and indicated impaired mitochondrial, peroxisomal, and liver functions. Analysis of the pulmonary transcriptome and plasma metabolome suggested impaired fatty acid catabolism regulated by peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor signaling. A representative four-metabolite model effectively diagnosed sepsis in primates (area under the curve, 0.966) and in two human sepsis cohorts (area under the curve, 0.78 and 0.82).

A model of sepsis based on reciprocal metabolomic and transcriptomic data was developed in primates and validated in two human patient cohorts. It is anticipated that the identified parameters will facilitate early diagnosis and management of sepsis.

Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) is a major causative organism of meningitis and sepsis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonococcus) is the causative organism of the sexually transmitted disease gonorrhea. Infections caused by meningococci are vaccine-preventable, whereas gonococcal vaccine research and development has languished for decades and the correlates of protection are still largely unknown. In the past two decades, complementary 'omic' platforms have been developed to interrogate Neisseria genomes and gene products. Proteomic techniques applied to whole Neisseria bacteria, outer membranes and outer membrane vesicle vaccines have generated protein maps and also allowed the examination of environmental stresses on protein expression. In particular, immuno-proteomics has identified proteins whose expression is correlated with the development of human natural immunity to meningococcal infection and colonization and following vaccination. Neisseria proteomic techniques have produced a catalog of potential vaccine antigens and investigating the functional and biological properties of these proteins could finally provide 'universal' Neisseria vaccines.

Single cell analysis is an emerging field requiring a high level interdisciplinary collaboration to provide detailed insights into the complex organisation, function and heterogeneity of life. This review is addressed to life science researchers as well as researchers developing novel technologies. It covers all aspects of the characterisation of single cells (with a special focus on mammalian cells) from morphology to genetics and different omics-techniques to physiological, mechanical and electrical methods. In recent years, tremendous advances have been achieved in all fields of single cell analysis: (1) improved spatial and temporal resolution of imaging techniques to enable the tracking of single molecule dynamics within single cells; (2) increased throughput to reveal unexpected heterogeneity between different individual cells raising the question what characterizes a cell type and what is just natural biological variation; and (3) emerging multimodal approaches trying to bring together information from complementary techniques paving the way for a deeper understanding of the complexity of biological processes. This review also covers the first successful translations of single cell analysis methods to diagnostic applications in the field of tumour research (especially circulating tumour cells), regenerative medicine, drug discovery and immunology.

Sepsis is a common cause of death in hospitalized patients worldwide. The early detection of sepsis remains a great challenge for clinicians, and delayed diagnosis frequently undermines treatment efforts, thereby contributing to high mortality. Omics technologies allow high-throughput screening of sepsis biomarkers. This review describes currently available and novel sepsis biomarkers in the context of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. The combination of these technologies can help refine the diagnosis of sepsis. This review paper serves as a reference for future studies that employ an integrated, multi-omics approach to disease identification.

One major discovery of the last decade in the field of metabolic diseases is that the microorganisms comprising the gut microbiota are now considered a metabolic "organ", modulating multiple functions of the host, such as intestinal immune system maturation, adiposity, cardiac metabolism, liver triglyceride storage, and brain development and behaviour. The corresponding mechanisms involve increased energy harvesting through the production by microbiota of short-chain fatty acids for use by the host, and the release of pro-inflammatory compounds, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), flagellin and peptidoglycan. In particular, a high-fat diet (HFD) modifies gut microbiota, resulting in an increase of plasma LPS levels known as "metabolic endotoxaemia", a major driver of the onset of metabolic diseases through a CD14-dependent mechanism. The LPS-sensitive cell types can be seen within bone marrow-derived cells (BMC), which are involved in the development of inflammation in the adipose tissue of obese and type 2 diabetic mice. Furthermore, the expression of LPS receptor/cofactor CD14 cells from the stromal vascular fraction of adipose depots can also be directly targeted by LPS to initiate precursor cell development and adiposity. Moreover, data from the literature also indicate an impact of gut microbiota on intestinal stem cells. Thus, this mini review presents the experimental evidence supporting a relationship between gut microbiota and stem cells as a new axis of metabolic homoeostasis control.

Metabolomics, the latest of omics disciplines, has been successfully used in various fields of basic research such as pharmacology and toxicology. Recently, this new science has gained an important role in the translational research of diagnostics. In this regard, the challenge for neonatologists and medical laboratories is to diagnose neonatal sepsis, a disease with high mortality and morbidity due to the difficulty in diagnosing it. Metabolomics, through its ability to identify perturbations caused by this condition, aims at recognizing metabolites that characterize neonatal sepsis with high specificity and sensitivity. The purpose of this review is to highlight the ability of metabolomics to find early biomarkers for this condition, as well as to predict the toxic effects caused by antibiotics.

The early, accurate diagnosis and risk stratification of sepsis remains an important challenge in the critically ill. Since traditional biomarker strategies have not yielded a gold standard marker for sepsis, focus is shifting towards novel strategies that improve assessment capabilities. The combination of technological advancements and information generated through the human genome project positions systems biology at the forefront of biomarker discovery. While previously available, developments in the technologies focusing on DNA, gene expression, gene regulatory mechanisms, protein and metabolite discovery have made these tools more feasible to implement and less costly, and they have taken on an enhanced capacity such that they are ripe for utilization as tools to advance our knowledge and clinical research. Medicine is in a genome-level era that can leverage the assessment of thousands of molecular signals beyond simply measuring selected circulating proteins. Genomics is the study of the entire complement of genetic material of an individual. Epigenetics is the regulation of gene activity by reversible modifications of the DNA. Transcriptomics is the quantification of the relative levels of messenger RNA for a large number of genes in specific cells or tissues to measure differences in the expression levels of different genes, and the utilization of patterns of differential gene expression to characterize different biological states of a tissue. Proteomics is the large-scale study of proteins. Metabolomics is the study of the small molecule profiles that are the terminal downstream products of the genome and consists of the total complement of all low-molecular-weight molecules that cellular processes leave behind. Taken together, these individual fields of study may be linked during a systems biology approach. There remains a valuable opportunity to deploy these technologies further in human research. The techniques described in this paper not only have the potential to increase the spectrum of diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in sepsis, but they may also enable the discovery of new disease pathways. This may in turn lead us to improved therapeutic targets. The objective of this paper is to provide an overview and basic framework for clinicians and clinical researchers to better understand the 'omics technologies' to enhance further use of these valuable tools.

Endotoxins also referred to as pyrogens are chemically lipopolysaccharides habitually found in food, environment and clinical products of bacterial origin and are unavoidable ubiquitous microbiological contaminants. Pernicious issues of its contamination result in high mortality and severe morbidities. Standard traditional techniques are slow and cumbersome, highlighting the pressing need for evoking agile endotoxin detection system. The early and prompt detection of endotoxin assumes prime importance in health care, pharmacological and biomedical sectors. The unparalleled recognition abilities of LAL biosensors perched with remarkable sensitivity, high stability and reproducibility have bestowed it with persistent reliability and their possible fabrication for commercial applicability. This review paper entails an overview of various trends in current techniques available and other possible alternatives in biosensor based endotoxin detection together with its classification, epidemiological aspects, thrust areas demanding endotoxin control, commercially available detection sensors and a revolutionary unprecedented approach narrating the influence of omics for endotoxin detection.

Modern toxicology has embraced in vitro methods, and major hopes are based on the omics technologies and systems biology approaches they bring along (Hartung and McBride, 2011; Hartung et al., 2012). A culture of stringent validation has been developed for such approaches (Leist et al., 2010, 2012a,b), while the quality and usefulness of animal experiments have been little scrutinized. A new study (Seok et al., 2013) now shows the low predictivity of animal responses in the field of inflammation. These findings corroborate earlier findings from comparisons in the fields of neurodegeneration, stroke and sepsis. The low predictivity of animal experiments in research areas allowing direct comparisons of mouse versus human data puts strong doubt on the usefulness of animal data as key technology to predict human safety.

Sepsis is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients. OMICS and systems pharmacology approaches offer the promise of new therapeutic candidates for the treatment of patients with sepsis. Qin-Re-Jie-Du (QRJD) and Liang-Xue-Huo-Xue (LXHX) are two traditional Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) formulas with putative effects in sepsis treatment. The present study aimed to assess their efficacy in an experimental model of sepsis in rats (cecal ligation and punctures) and investigate their mechanism of action using a 1H-NMR metabolomics approach. Rats were randomly divided into four groups (i.e., model group, sham control group, and two CHM treatment groups). Water extracts of QRJD and LXHX were orally administered to the two CHM treatment groups at a dose of 24 g/kg of body weight, once daily for 3 consecutive days. The same volume of 0.9% saline solution was orally administered to the model and sham surgery groups. Plasma samples were collected and measured using 600 MHz 1H-NMR spectroscopy. As a result, 18 potential metabolite biomarkers involved in multiple metabolic pathways, including increased energy metabolism, fat mobilization, and disrupted amino acid metabolism, were identified in septic rats. The principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares discriminant (PLS-DA) plots of the metabolic state correlated well with the mortality and clinical biochemistry results. An analysis of potential biomarkers verified the holistic effects of the two CHM formulas. The Cori cycle was positively regulated in the QRJD-treated formulas treatment group but also inhibited in the LXHX-treated group, which demonstrates the different efficacies of these solutions in septic rats.

Modern toxicology has embraced in vitro methods, and major hopes are based on the Omics technologies and systems biology approaches they bring along (Hartung and McBride in ALTEX 28(2):83-93, 2011; Hartung et al. in ALTEX 29(2):119-28, 2012). A culture of stringent validation has been developed for such approaches (Leist et al. in ALTEX 27(4):309-317, 2010; ALTEX 29(4):373-88, 2012a; Toxicol Res 1:8-22, 2012b), while the quality and usefulness of animal experiments have been little scrutinized. A new study (Seok et al. 2013) now shows the low predictivity of animal responses in the field of inflammation. These findings corroborate earlier findings from comparisons in the fields of neurodegeneration, stroke and sepsis. The low predictivity of animal experiments in research areas allowing direct comparisons of mouse versus human data puts strong doubt on the usefulness of animal data as key technology to predict human safety.

The newest 'omics' science is metabolomics, the latest offspring of genomics, considered the most innovative of the 'omics' sciences. Metabolomics, also called the 'new clinical biochemistry', is an approach based on the systematic study of the complete set of metabolites in a biological sample. The metabolome is considered the most predictive phenotype and is capable of considering epigenetic differences. It is so close to the phenotype that it can be considered the phenotype itself. In the last three years about 5000 papers have been listed in PubMed on this topic, but few data are available in the newborn. The aim of this review, after a description of background and technical procedures, is to analyse the clinical applications of metabolomics in neonatology, covering the following points: gestational age, postnatal age, type of delivery, zygosity, perinatal asphyxia, intrauterine growth restriction, prenatal inflammation and brain injury, respiratory, cardiovascular renal, metabolic diseases; sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis and antibiotic treatment; nutritional studies on maternal milk and formula, pharma-metabolomics, long-term diseases. Pros and cons of metabolomics are also discussed. All this comes about with the non-invasive collection of a few drops of urine (exceptionally important for the neonate, especially those of low birth weight). Only time and large-scale studies to validate initial results will place metabolomics within neonatology. In any case, it is important for perinatologists to learn and understand this new technology to offer their patients the utmost in diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities.

Leptospirosis is a zoonotic infectious disease of tropical, subtropical and temperate zones, which is caused by the pathogenic spirochetes of genus Leptospira. Although this zoonosis is generally not considered as fatal, the pathogen can eventually cause severe infection with septic shock, multi-organ failure and lethal pulmonary hemorrhages leading to mortality. In this study, we have performed a proteomic analysis of serum samples from leptospirosis patients (n=6), febrile controls (falciparum malaria) (n=8) and healthy subjects (n=18) to obtain an insight about disease pathogenesis and host immune responses in leptospiral infections. 2DE and 2D-DIGE analysis in combination with MALDI-TOF/TOF MS revealed differential expression of 22 serum proteins in leptospirosis patients compared to the healthy controls. Among the identified differentially expressed proteins, 8 candidates exhibited different trends compared to the febrile controls. Functional analysis suggested the involvement of differentially expressed proteins in vital physiological pathways, including acute phase response, complement and coagulation cascades and hemostasis. This is the first report of analysis of human serum proteome alterations in leptospirosis patients, which revealed several differentially expressed proteins, including α-1-antitrypsin, vitronectin, ceruloplasmin, G-protein signaling regulator, apolipoprotein A-IV, which have not been reported in context of leptospirosis previously. This study will enhance our understanding about leptospirosis pathogenesis and provide a glimpse of host immunological responses. Additionally, a few differentially expressed proteins identified in this study may further be investigated as diagnostic or prognostic serum biomarkers for leptospirosis. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Integrated omics.

The youngest and more rapidly increasing "omic" discipline, called metabolomics, is the process of describing the phenotype of a cell, tissue or organism through the full complement of metabolites present. Metabolomics measure global sets of low molecular weight metabolites (including amino acids, organic acids, sugars, fatty acids, lipids, steroids, small peptides, vitamins, etc.), thus providing a "snapshot" of the metabolic status of a cell, tissue or organism in relation to genetic variations or external stimuli. The use of metabolomics appears to be a promising tool in neonatology. The management of sick newborns might improve if more information on perinatal/neonatal maturational processes and their metabolic background were available. Urine ("a window on the organism") is a biofluid particularly suitable for metabolomic analysis in neonatology because it may be collected by using simple, noninvasive techniques and because it may provide valuable diagnostic information. In this review, the authors report the few literature data on neonatal metabolomics, including their personal experience, in the following fields: intrauterine growth restriction, perinatal transition, asphyxia, brain injury and hypothermia, maternal milk evaluation, postnatal maturation, bronchiolitis, sepsis, patent ductus arteriosus, respiratory distress syndrome, nephrouropathies, metabolic diseases, antibiotic treatment, perinatal programming and long-term outcome in extremely low birth-weight infants.

In this article, we review recent developments in translational research in the fields of acute lung injury, acute kidney injury and sepsis with a focus on emerging biomarkers and outline future advances in the field.

There is currently a significant and unmet need for high quality translational research in critical care. The emergence of '-omics' technologies and sophisticated imaging techniques have resulted in a rapid growth of emerging biomarkers. Biomarkers would ideally provide early and reliable endpoints for proof of concept in clinical trials and inform clinical decision making through earlier and more precise diagnosis and risk stratification.

Despite significant investment in basic science and time-consuming clinical trials, the majority of pharmacological interventions developed for critical illness have yet to translate into measurable clinical benefit. Future validation and qualification of emerging biomarkers allied to advances in pharmacogenomic profiling have the potential to provide valuable clinical information while accurately phenotyping patients enrolled in future clinical trials.

To establish a new method for the study of DNA-protein interaction.

Six SPF BALB/c mice were divided into two groups, the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated group (n=3) and the normal control group (n =3). The LPS-treated mice were subjected to tail vein-injection of LPS (25 mg/kg) to reproduce an endotoxic shock model. The biotin-labeled DNA probe for the LPS inducible gene (LIG) promoter was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The cell nuclear extracts from liver of mice were prepared and mixed together. DNA pull-down assays were performed by using magnetic beads conjugated with streptavidin. Proteins binding on the beads were eluted by salts with different concentrations. The samples were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and displayed by silver-stain to compare differential bands between two groups.

Fifteen proteins in the nuclear extracts were found to be different between the mice of two groups. Analysis of the differential bands of SDS-PAGE displayed that, compared with normal control group, there were four proteins increased and one protein declined in the mice treated with LPS when eluted with low salt. While under the condition of high affinity elution, there were nine proteins increased and one disappeared after LPS treatment.

In this study, a novel method was set up by combining the biotin-streptavidin system and magnetic beads isolation technique, providing a new way to study DNA-protein interaction. This strategy is helpful for further understanding the regulation of gene expression with a view of "omics".
